The Constitution of Nepal
Date of Publication in Nepal Gazette
20 September 2015 (2072.6.3)
The Constitution of Nepal (First Amendment), 2016 (2072)
28 February 2016 (2072.11.16)
Preamble:
We, the Sovereign People of Nepal,
Internalizing the people's sovereign right and right to autonomy
and self-rule, while maintaining freedom, sovereignty, territorial
integrity, national unity, independence and dignity of Nepal,
Recalling the glorious history of historic people's movements,
armed conflict, dedication and sacrifice undertaken by the
Nepalese people at times for the interest of the nation,
democracy and progressive changes, and respecting for the
martyrs and disappeared and victim citizens,
Ending all forms of discrimination and oppression created by the
feudalistic, autocratic, centralized, unitary system of
governance,
Protecting and promoting social and cultural solidarity, tolerance
and harmony, and unity in diversity by recognizing the multiethnic, multi-lingual, multi-religious, multi-cultural and diverse
regional characteristics, resolving to build an egalitarian society
founded on the proportional inclusive and participatory
principles in order to ensure economic equality, prosperity and
social justice, by eliminating discrimination based on class,
caste, region, language, religion and gender and all forms of
caste-based untouchability, and

(1)

Being committed to socialism based on democratic norms and
values including the people's competitive multiparty democratic
system of governance, civil liberties, fundamental rights, human
rights, adult franchise, periodic elections, full freedom of the
press, and independent, impartial and competent judiciary and
concept of the rule of law, and build a prosperous nation,
Do hereby pass and promulgate this Constitution, through the
Constituent Assembly, in order to fulfil the aspirations for
sustainable peace, good governance, development and
prosperity through the federal, democratic, republican system of
governance.

(2)

Part-1
Preliminary
1.

Constitution as the fundamental law: (1) This
Constitution is the fundamental law of Nepal. Any law
inconsistent with this Constitution shall, to the extent of
such inconsistency, be void.
(2) It shall be the duty of every person to observe
this Constitution.

2.

Sovereignty and state authority: The sovereignty and
state authority of Nepal shall be vested in the Nepalese
people. It shall be exercised in accordance with the
provisions set forth in this Constitution.

3.

Nation: All the Nepalese people, with multiethnic,
multilingual, multireligious, multicultural characteristics
and in geographical diversities, and having common
aspirations and being united by a bond of allegiance to
national independence, territorial integrity, national
interest and prosperity of Nepal, collectively constitute
the nation.

4.

State of Nepal: (1) Nepal is an independent, indivisible,
sovereign, secular, inclusive, democratic, socialismoriented, federal democratic republican state.
Explanation: For the purposes of this Article,
"secular" means religious, cultural freedoms, including
protection of religion, culture handed down from the
time immemorial.
(2) The territory of Nepal shall comprise:
(a)

the territory existing at the time of
commencement of this Constitution, and

(b)

such other territory as may be acquired
after the commencement of this
Constitution.
(3)

5.

National interest: (1) Safeguarding of the freedom,
sovereignty,
territorial
integrity,
nationality,
independence and dignity of Nepal, the rights of the
Nepalese people, border security, economic wellbeing
and prosperity shall be the basic elements of the national
interest of Nepal.
(2) Any conduct and act contrary to the national
interest shall be punishable by the Federal law.

6.

Languages of the nation: All languages spoken as the
mother tongues in Nepal are the languages of the nation.

7.

Official language: (1) The Nepali language in the
Devnagari script shall be the official language of Nepal.
(2) A State may, by State law, determine one or
more than one languages of the nation spoken by a
majority of people within the State as its official
language(s), in addition to the Nepali language.
(3) Other matters relating to language shall be as
decided by the Government of Nepal, on
recommendation of the Language Commission.

8.

National flag: (1) The national flag of Nepal consists of
two juxtaposed triangular figures with a crimsoncoloured base and deep blue borders, there being a white
emblem of the crescent moon with eight rays visible out
of sixteen in the upper part and a white emblem of a
twelve rayed sun in the lower part.
(2) The method of drawing out the flag and other
particulars relating thereto shall be as set forth in
Schedule-1.

9.

National anthem etc: (1) The national anthem of Nepal
shall be as set forth in Schedule-2.
(2) The coat-of-arms of Nepal shall be as set
forth in Schedule-3.
(4)

(3) The Rhododendron Arboreum shall be the
national flower, Crimson Colour shall be the national
colour, the Cow shall be the national animal and the
Lophophorus shall be the national bird of Nepal.

(5)

Part-2
Citizenship
10.

Not to deprive of citizenship: (1) No citizen of Nepal
shall be deprived of the right to obtain citizenship.
(2) There is a provision of single federal
citizenship with State identity in Nepal.

11.

To be citizens of Nepal: (1) The persons who have
obtained the citizenship of Nepal at the time of
commencement of this Constitution and who are
qualified to obtain citizenship in accordance with this
Part shall be the citizens of Nepal.
(2) The following person who has his or her
permanent domicile in Nepal at the time of
commencement of this Constitution shall be the citizen
of Nepal by descent:
(a)

a person who has obtained the
citizenship of Nepal by descent prior to
the commencement of this Constitution,

(b)

a person whose father or mother was a
citizen of Nepal at his or her birth.

(3) A child of a citizen having obtained the
citizenship of Nepal by birth prior to the commencement
of this Constitution shall, upon attaining majority,
acquire the citizenship of Nepal by descent if the child's
father and mother both are citizens of Nepal.
(4) Every minor who is found within Nepal and
the whereabouts of whose father and mother are not
known shall, until the father or the mother of the child is
traced, be a citizen of Nepal by descent.
(5) A person who is born in Nepal from a woman
who is a citizen of Nepal and has resided in Nepal and
(6)

whose father is not traced shall be provided with the
citizenship of Nepal by descent.
Provided that his or her father is held to be a
foreign citizen, the citizenship of such person shall be
converted into naturalized citizenship as provided for in
the Federal law.
(6) A foreign woman who has a matrimonial
relationship with a citizen of Nepal may, if she so
wishes, acquire the naturalized citizenship of Nepal as
provided for in the Federal law.
(7)
Notwithstanding
anything
contained
elsewhere in this Article, in the case of a person born
from a woman who is a citizen of Nepal and married to a
foreign citizen, the person may acquire the naturalized
citizenship of Nepal in accordance with the Federal law
if he or she has permanently resided in Nepal and has not
acquired the citizenship of a foreign country.
Provided that if such person's mother and father
both are citizens of Nepal at the time of acquisition of
citizenship, such person born in Nepal may acquire the
citizenship of Nepal by descent.
(8) In the cases other than those mentioned in this
Article, the Government of Nepal may, in accordance
with the Federal law, grant the naturalized citizenship of
Nepal.
(9) The Government of Nepal may, in accordance
with the Federal law, grant the honorary citizenship of
Nepal.
(10) Whenever any territory is acquired by way
of merger into Nepal, a person having his or her domicile
in such territory shall become a citizen of Nepal, subject
to the Federal law.

(7)

12.

Citizenship with identity of descent and gender: A
person who obtains the citizenship of Nepal by descent
in accordance with this Constitution may obtain a
certificate of citizenship of Nepal with gender identity by
the name of his or her mother or father.

13.

Acquisition, reacquisition and termination of citizenship:
Other matters relating to the acquisition, reacquisition
and termination of citizenship shall be as provided for in
the Federal law.

14.

Power to grant non-resident Nepalese citizenship: The
non-residential citizenship of Nepal may be so granted to
a person who has acquired the citizenship of a foreign
country, has resided in a country other than a member
state of the South Asian Association for Regional
Cooperation, and who or whose father or mother,
grandfather or grandmother was previously a citizen of
Nepal by decent or birth but subsequently acquired the
citizenship of the foreign country that such person may
enjoy economic, social and cultural rights in accordance
with the Federal law.

15.

Other provisions relating to citizenship of Nepal: Other
matters relating to the maintenance of records setting out
the identity of every citizen of Nepal and the citizenship
of Nepal shall be as provided for in the Federal law.

(8)

Part-3
Fundamental Rights and Duties
16.

Right to live with dignity: (1) Every person shall have
the right to live with dignity.
(2) No law shall be made providing for the death
penalty to any one.

17.

Right to freedom: (1) No person shall be deprived of his
or her personal liberty except in accordance with law.
(2) Every citizen shall have the following
freedoms:
(a)

freedom of opinion and expression,

(b)

freedom to assemble peaceably and without
arms,

(c)

freedom to form political parties,

(d)

freedom to form unions and associations,

(e)

freedom to move and reside in any part of
Nepal,

(f)

freedom to practice any profession, carry on
any occupation, and establish and operate any
industry, trade and business in any part of
Nepal.

Provided that:
(1)

Nothing in sub-clause (a) shall be deemed to
prevent the making of an Act to impose
reasonable restrictions on any act which may
undermine the sovereignty, territorial
integrity, nationality and independence of
Nepal or the harmonious relations between
the Federal Units or the people of various
castes, tribes, religions or communities or
(9)

incite
caste-based
discrimination
or
untouchability or on any act of disrespect of
labour, defamation, contempt of court,
incitement to an offence or on any act which
may be contrary to public decency or
morality.
(2)

Nothing in sub-clause (b) shall be deemed to
prevent the making of an Act to impose
reasonable restrictions on any act which may
undermine the sovereignty, territorial
integrity, nationality and independence of
Nepal or the harmonious relations between
the Federal Units or public peace and order.

(3)

Nothing in sub-clause (c) shall be deemed to
prevent the making of an Act to impose
reasonable restrictions on any act which may
undermine the sovereignty, territorial
integrity, nationality and independence of
Nepal, constitute an espionage against the
nation or divulge national secrecy or on any
act of rendering assistance to any foreign
state, organization or representative in a
manner to undermine the security of Nepal or
on an act of treason or on any act which may
undermine the harmonious relations between
the Federal Units or on any act of incitement
to caste-based or communal hatred or on any
act which may undermine the harmonious
relations between various castes, tribes,
religions and communities, or on any act of
acquisition of, or restriction on, membership
of any political party on the basis solely of
tribe, language, religion, community or sex
or on any act of formation of a political party
with discrimination between citizens or on
(10)

incitement to violent acts or on any act which
may be contrary to public morality.
(4)

Nothing in sub-clause (d) shall be deemed to
prevent the making of an Act to impose
reasonable restrictions on any act which may
undermine the sovereignty, territorial
integrity, nationality and independence of
Nepal, or on any act which may constitute
espionage against the nation or on any act of
divulgence of national secrecy or on any act
assisting any foreign state, organization or
representative in a manner to undermine the
security of Nepal or on an act of treason or on
any act which may undermine the
harmonious relations between the Federal
Units or on any act of incitement to castebased or communal hatred or on any act
which may undermine the harmonious
relations between various castes, tribes,
religions and communities or on incitement to
violent acts or on any act which may be
contrary to public morality.

(5)

Nothing in sub-clause (e) shall be deemed to
prevent the making of an Act to impose
reasonable restrictions on any act which may
undermine the interest of the general public
or which may undermine the harmonious
relations between the Federal Units or the
harmonious relations between the peoples of
various
castes,
tribes,
religions
or
communities or which may constitute or
incite violent acts.

(6)

Nothing in sub-clause (f) shall be deemed to
prevent the making of an Act to prevent any
act which may undermine the harmonious
(11)

relations between the Federal Units or any act
which may be contrary to public health,
decency or morality of the general public or
to confer on the State the exclusive right to
undertake any specific industry, trade or
service, or to prescribe any condition or
qualification for carrying on any industry,
trade, occupation, employment or business.
18.

Right to equality: (1) All citizens shall be equal before
law. No person shall be denied the equal protection of
law.
(2) No discrimination shall be made in the
application of general laws on grounds of origin,
religion, race, caste, tribe, sex, physical condition,
condition of health, marital status, pregnancy, economic
condition, language or region, ideology or on similar
other grounds.
(3) The State shall not discriminate citizens on
grounds of origin, religion, race, caste, tribe, sex,
economic condition, language, region, ideology or on
similar other grounds.
Provided that nothing shall be deemed to prevent
the making of special provisions by law for the
protection, empowerment or development of the citizens
including the socially or culturally backward women,
Dalit, indigenous people, indigenous nationalities,
Madhesi, Tharu, Muslim, oppressed class, Pichhada
class, minorities, the marginalized, farmers, labours,
youths, children, senior citizens, gender and sexual
minorities, persons with disabilities, persons in
pregnancy, incapacitated or helpless, backward region
and indigent Khas Arya.

(12)

Explanation: For the purposes of this Part and Part 4,
"indigent" means a person who earns income less than
that specified by the Federal law.
(4) No discrimination shall be made on the
ground of gender with regard to remuneration and social
security for the same work.
(5) All offspring shall have the equal right to the
ancestral property without discrimination on the ground
of gender.
19.

Right to communication: (1) No publication and
broadcasting or dissemination or printing of any news
item, editorial, feature article or other reading, audio and
audio-visual material through any means whatsoever
including electronic publication, broadcasting and
printing shall be censored.
Provided that nothing shall be deemed to prevent
the making of Acts to impose reasonable restrictions on
any act which may undermine the sovereignty, territorial
integrity, nationality of Nepal or the harmonious
relations between the Federal Units or the harmonious
relations between various castes, tribes, religions or
communities, or on any act of treason, defamation or
contempt of court or incitement to an offence, or on any
act which may be contrary to public decency or morality,
on any act of hatred to labour and on any act of
incitement to caste-based untouchability as well as
gender discrimination.
(2) No radio, television, on-line or other form of
digital or electronic equipment, press or other means of
communication publishing, broadcasting or printing any
news item, feature, editorial, article, information or other
material shall be closed or seized nor shall registration
thereof be cancelled nor shall such material be seized by
the reason of publication, broadcasting or printing of
(13)

such material through any audio, audio-visual or
electronic equipment.
Provided that nothing contained in this clause shall
be deemed to prevent the making of an Act to regulate
radio, television, online or any other form of digital or
electronic equipment, press or other means of
communication.
(3) No means of communication including the
press, electronic broadcasting and telephone shall be
interrupted except in accordance with law.
20.

Rights relating to justice: (1) No person shall be detained
in custody without informing him or her of the ground
for his or her arrest.
(2) Any person who is arrested shall have the
right to consult a legal practitioner of his or her choice
from the time of such arrest and to be defended by such
legal practitioner. Any consultation made by such person
with, and advice given by, his or her legal practitioner
shall be confidential.
Provided this clause shall not apply to a citizen
of an enemy state.
Explanation: For the purpose of this clause, "legal
practitioner" means any person who is authorized by law
to represent any person in any court.
(3) Any person who is arrested shall be produced
before the adjudicating authority within a period of
twenty-four hours of such arrest, excluding the time
necessary for the journey from the place of arrest to such
authority; and any such person shall not be detained in
custody except on the order of such authority.

(14)

Provided that this clause shall not apply to a person
held in preventive detention and to a citizen of an enemy
state.
(4) No person shall be liable for punishment for
an act which was not punishable by the law in force
when the act was committed nor shall any person be
subjected to a punishment greater than that prescribed by
the law in force at the time of the commission of the
offence.
(5) Every person charged with an offence shall be
presumed innocent until proved guilty of the offence.
(6) No person shall be tried and punished for the
same offence in a court more than once.
(7) No person charged with an offence shall be
compelled to testify against himself or herself.
(8) Every person shall have the right to be
informed of any proceedings taken against him or her.
(9) Every person shall have the right to a fair trial
by an independent, impartial and competent court or
judicial body.
(10) Any indigent party shall have the right to free
legal aid in accordance with law.
21.

Right of victim of crime: (1) A victim of crime shall
have the right to get information about the investigation
and proceedings of a case in which he or she is the
victim.
(2) A victim of crime shall have the right to
justice including social rehabilitation and compensation
in accordance with law.

22.

Right against torture: (1) No person who is arrested or
detained shall be subjected to physical or mental torture
or to cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment.
(15)

(2) Any act mentioned in clause (1) shall be
punishable by law, and any person who is the victim of
such treatment shall have the right to obtain
compensation in accordance with law.
23.

Right against preventive detention: (1) No person shall
be held under preventive detention unless there is a
sufficient ground of the existence of an immediate threat
to the sovereignty, territorial integrity or public peace and
order of Nepal.
(2) Information about the situation of a person who
is held under preventive detention pursuant to clause (1)
must be given immediately to his or her family members
or relatives.
Provided that this clause shall not apply to a citizen
of an enemy state.
(3) If the authority making preventive detention
holds any person under preventive detention contrary to
law or in bad faith, the person held under preventive
detention shall have the right to obtain compensation in
accordance with law.

24.

Right against untouchability and discrimination: (1) No
person shall be subjected to any form of untouchability
or discrimination in any private and public places on
grounds of his or her origin, caste, tribe, community,
profession, occupation or physical condition.
(2) In producing or distributing any goods, services
or facilities, no person belonging to any particular caste
or tribe shall be prevented from purchasing or acquiring
such goods, services or facilities nor shall such goods,
services or facilities be sold, distributed or provided only
to the persons belonging to any particular caste or tribe.
(3) No act purporting to demonstrate any person or
community as superior or inferior on grounds of origin,
(16)

caste, tribe or physical condition or justifying social
discrimination on grounds of caste, tribe or
untouchability or propagating ideology based on
untouchability and caste based superiority or hatred or
encouraging caste-based discrimination in any manner
whatsoever shall be allowed.
(4) No discrimination in any form shall be allowed
at a workplace with or without making untouchability on
the ground of caste.
(5) Any act of untouchability and discrimination in
any form committed in contravention of this Article shall
be punishable by law as a severe social offence, and the
victim of such act shall have the right to obtain
compensation in accordance with law.
25.

Right relating to property: (1) Every citizen shall, subject
to law, have the right to acquire, own, sell, dispose,
acquire business profits from, and otherwise deal with,
property.
Provided that the State may levy tax on property of
a person, and tax on income of a person in accordance
with the concept of progressive taxation.
Explanation: For the purposes of this Article,
"property" means any form of property including
movable and immovable property, and includes an
intellectual property right.
(2) The State shall not, except for public interest,
requisition, acquire, or otherwise create any
encumbrance on, property of a person.
Provided that this clause shall not apply to any
property acquired by any person illicitly.
(3) The basis of compensation to be provided and
procedures to be followed in the requisition by the State
(17)

of property of any person for public interest in
accordance with clause (2) shall be as provided for in the
Act.
(4) The provisions of clauses (2) and (3) shall not
prevent the State from making land reforms,
management and regulation in accordance with law for
the purposes of enhancement of product and productivity
of lands, modernization and commercialization of
agriculture, environment protection and planned housing
and urban development.
(5) Nothing shall prevent the State from using the
property of any person, which it has requisitioned for
public interest in accordance with clause (3), for any
other public interest instead of such public interest.
26.

Right to freedom of religion: (1) Every person who has
faith in religion shall have the freedom to profess,
practice and protect his or her religion according to his
or her conviction.
(2) Every religious denomination shall have the
right to operate and protect its religious sites and
religious Guthi (trusts).
Provided that nothing shall be deemed to prevent
the regulation, by making law, of the operation and
protection of religious sites and religious trusts and
management of trust properties and lands.
(3) No person shall, in the exercise of the right
conferred by this Article, do, or cause to be done, any act
which may be contrary to public health, decency and
morality or breach public peace, or convert another
person from one religion to another or any act or conduct
that may jeopardize other's religion and such act shall

be punishable by law.

(18)

27.

Right to information: Every citizen shall have the right to
demand and receive information on any matter of his or
her interest or of public interest.
Provided that no one shall be compelled to
provide information on any matter of which
confidentiality must be maintained in accordance with
law.

28.

Right to privacy: The privacy of any person, his or her
residence, property, document, data, correspondence and
matters relating to his or her character shall, except in
accordance with law, be inviolable.

29.

Right against exploitation: (1) Every person shall have
the right against exploitation.
(2) No person shall be exploited in any manner on
the grounds of religion, custom, tradition, usage, practice
or on any other grounds.
(3) No one shall be subjected to trafficking nor
shall one be held in slavery or servitude.
(4) No one shall be forced to work against his or
her will.
Provided that nothing shall be deemed to prevent
the making of law empowering the State to require citizens
to perform compulsory service for public purposes.
(5) Act contrary to clauses (3) and (4) shall be
punishable by law and the victim shall have the right to
obtain compensation from the perpetrator in accordance
with law.

30.

Right to clean environment: (1) Every citizen shall have
the right to live in a clean and healthy environment.
(2) The victim shall have the right to obtain
compensation, in accordance with law, for any injury
caused from environmental pollution or degradation.
(19)

(3) This Article shall not be deemed to prevent the
making of necessary legal provisions for a proper
balance between the environment and development, in
development works of the nation.
31.

Right relating to education: (1) Every citizen shall have
the right of access to basic education.
(2) Every citizen shall have the right to get
compulsory and free education up to the basic level and
free education up to the secondary level from the State.
(3) The citizens with disabilities and the
economically indigent citizens shall have the right to get
free higher education in accordance with law.
(4) The visually impaired citizens shall have the
right to get free education through brail script and the
citizens with hearing or speaking impairment, to get free
education through sign language, in accordance with law.
(5) Every Nepalese community residing in Nepal
shall have the right to get education in its mother tongue
and, for that purpose, to open and operate schools and
educational institutes, in accordance with law.

32.

Right to language and culture: (1) Every person and
community shall have the right to use their languages.
(2) Every person and community shall have the
right to participate in the cultural life of their
communities.
(3) Every Nepalese community residing in Nepal
shall have the right to preserve and promote its language,
script, culture, cultural civilization and heritage.

33.

Right to employment: (1) Every citizen shall have the
right to employment. The terms and conditions of
employment, and unemployment benefit shall be as
provided for in the Federal law.
(20)

(2) Every citizen shall have the right to choose
employment.
34.

Right to labour: (1) Every labourer shall have the right to
fair labour practice.
Explanation: For the purposes of this Article,
"labourer" means a labourer or worker who does
physical or mental work for an employer in
consideration for remuneration.
(2) Every labourer shall have the right to
appropriate remuneration, facilities and contributory
social security.
(3) Every labourer shall have the right to form and
join trade unions and to engage in collective bargaining,
in accordance with law.

35.

Right relating to health: (1) Every citizen shall have the
right to free basic health services from the State, and no
one shall be deprived of emergency health services.
(2) Every person shall have the right to get
information about his or her medical treatment.
(3) Every citizen shall have equal access to health
services.
(4) Every citizen shall have the right of access to
clean drinking water and sanitation.

36.

Right relating to food: (1) Every citizen shall have the
right relating to food.
(2) Every citizen shall have the right to be safe
from the state of being in danger of life from the scarcity
of food.
(3) Every citizen shall have the right to food
sovereignty in accordance with law.

(21)

37.

Right to housing: (1) Every citizen shall have the right to
an appropriate housing.
(2) No citizen shall be evicted from the residence
owned by him or her nor shall his or her residence be
infringed except in accordance with law.

38.

Rights of women: (1) Every woman shall have equal
lineage right without gender based discrimination.
(2) Every woman shall have the right to safe
motherhood and reproductive health.
(3) No woman shall be subjected to physical,
mental, sexual, psychological or other form of violence
or exploitation on grounds of religion, social, cultural
tradition, practice or on any other grounds. Such act shall
be punishable by law, and the victim shall have the right
to obtain compensation in accordance with law.
(4) Women shall have the right to participate in
all bodies of the State on the basis of the principle of
proportional inclusion.
(5) Women shall have the right to obtain special
opportunity in education, health, employment and social
security, on the basis of positive discrimination.
(6) The spouse shall have the equal right to
property and family affairs.

39.

Rights of child: (1) Every child shall have the right to
name and birth registration along with his or her identity.
(2) Every child shall have the right to education,
health, maintenance, proper care, sports, entertainment
and overall personality development from the families
and the State.
(3) Every child shall have the right to elementary
child development and child participation.
(22)

(4) No child shall be employed to work in any
factory, mine or engaged in similar other hazardous work.
(5) No child shall be subjected to child marriage,
transported illegally, abducted/kidnapped or taken in
hostage.
(6) No child shall be recruited or used in army,
police or any armed group, or be subjected, in the name of
cultural or religious traditions, to abuse, exclusion or
physical, mental, sexual or other form of exploitation or
improper use by any means or in any manner.
(7) No child shall be subjected to physical, mental
or any other form of torture in home, school or other place
and situation whatsoever.
(8) Every child shall have the right to juvenile
friendly justice.
(9) The child who is helpless, orphan, with
disabilities, conflict victim, displaced or vulnerable shall
have the right to special protection and facilities from the
State.
(10) Any act contrary to in clauses (4), (5), (6) and
(7) shall be punishable by law, and a child who is the
victim of such act shall have the right to obtain
compensation from the perpetrator, in accordance with
law.
40.

Rights of Dalit: (1) The Dalit shall have the right to
participate in all bodies of the State on the basis of the
principle of proportional inclusion. Special provision
shall be made by law for the empowerment,
representation and participation of the Dalit community
in public services as well as other sectors of employment.
(2) Provision of free education with scholarship,
from primary to higher education, shall be made by law
(23)

for the Dalit students. Special provision shall be made by
law for the Dalit in technical and vocational education.
(3) Special provision shall be made by law in
order to provide health and social security to the Dalit
community.
(4) The Dalit community shall have the right to
use, protect and develop their traditional occupation,
knowledge, skill and technology. The State shall accord
priority to the Dalit community in modern business
related with their traditional occupation and provide
skills and resources required therefor.
(5) The State shall once provide land to the
landless Dalit in accordance with law.
(6) The State shall, in accordance with law,
arrange settlement for the Dalit who do not have
housing.
(7) The facilities conferred by this Article to the
Dalit community must be distributed in a just manner so
that the Dalit women, men and Dalit in all communities
can obtain such facilities proportionately.
41.

Rights of senior citizens: The senior citizens shall have
the right to special protection and social security from
the State.

42.

Right to social justice: (1)  The economically, socially
or educationally backward women, Dalit, indigenous
nationalities, Madhesi, Tharu, Muslims, backward
classes, minorities, marginalized communities,
persons with disabilities, gender and sexual
minorities, farmers, labourers, oppressed or citizens



Amended by the First Amendment.
(24)

of backward regions and indigent Khas Arya shall
have the right to participate in the State bodies on the
basis of principle of proportional inclusion.
(2) The indigent citizens and citizens of the
communities on the verge of extinction shall have the
right to get special opportunities and benefits in
education, health, housing, employment, food and social
security for their protection, upliftment, empowerment
and development.
(3) The citizens with disabilities shall have the
right to live with dignity and honour, with the identity of
their diversity, and have equal access to public services
and facilities.
(4) Every farmer shall have the right to have
access to lands for agro activities, select and protect local
seeds and agro species which have been used and
pursued traditionally, in accordance with law.
(5) The families of the martyrs who have
sacrificed their life, persons who were forced to
disappear, and those who became disabled and injured in
all people's movements, armed conflicts and revolutions
that have been carried out for progressive democratic
changes in Nepal, democracy fighters, conflict victims
and displaced ones, persons with disabilities, the injured
and victims shall have the right to get a prioritized
opportunity, with justice and due respect, in education,
health, employment, housing and social security, in
accordance with law.
43.

Right to social security: The indigent citizens,
incapacitated and helpless citizens, helpless single women,
citizens with disabilities, children, citizens who cannot take
care themselves and citizens belonging to the tribes on
the verge of extinction shall have the right to social
security, in accordance with law.
(25)

44.

Rights of consumer: (1) Every consumer shall have the
right to obtain quality goods and services.
(2) A person who has suffered injury from any
substandard goods or services shall have the right to
obtain compensation in accordance with law.

45.

Right against exile: No citizen shall be exiled.

46.

Right to constitutional remedies: There shall be a right to
obtain constitutional remedies in the manner set forth in
Article 133 or 144 for the enforcement of the rights
conferred by this Part.

47.

Implementation of fundamental rights: The State shall, as
required, make legal provisions for the implementation
of the rights conferred by this Part, within three years of
the commencement of this Constitution.

48.

Duties of citizens: Every citizen shall have the following
duties:
(a)

to safeguard the nationality, sovereignty and
integrity of Nepal, while being loyal to the
nation,

(b)

to abide by the Constitution and law,

(c)

to render compulsory service as and when the
State so requires,

(d)

to protect and preserve public property.

(26)

Part-4
Directive Principles, Policies and Obligations of the State
49.

To be guiding principles: (1) The directive principles,
policies and obligations set forth in this Part shall be the
guiding principles for the governance of the State.
(2) The State shall mobilize, or cause to be
mobilized, means and resources, as required, to
implement the principles, policies and obligations set
forth in this Part.

50.

Directive principles: (1) The political objective of the
State shall be to establish a public welfare system of
governance, by establishing a just system in all aspects of
the national life through the rule of law, values and
norms of fundamental rights and human rights, gender
equality, proportional inclusion, participation and social
justice, while at the same time protecting the life,
property, equality and liberties of the people, in keeping
with the vitality of freedom, sovereignty, territorial
integrity and independence of Nepal, and to consolidate a
federal democratic republican system of governance in
order to ensure an atmosphere conducive to the
enjoyment of the fruits of democracy, while at the same
time maintaining the relations between the Federal Units
on the basis of cooperative federalism and incorporating
the principle of proportional participation in the system
of governance on the basis of local autonomy and
decentralization.
(2) The social and cultural objective of the State
shall be to build a civilized and egalitarian society by
eliminating all forms of discrimination, exploitation and
injustice on the grounds of religion, culture, tradition,
usage, custom, practice or on any other similar grounds,
to develop social, cultural values founded on national
pride, democracy, pro-people, respect of labour,
(27)

entrepreneurship, discipline, dignity and harmony, and to
consolidate the national unity by maintaining social
cohesion, solidarity and harmony, while recognizing
cultural diversity.
(3) The economic objective of the State shall be
to achieve a sustainable economic development, while
achieving rapid economic growth, by way of maximum
mobilization of the available means and resources
through participation and development of public, private
and cooperatives, and to develop a socialism-oriented
independent and prosperous economy while making the
national economy independent, self-reliant and
progressive in order to build an exploitation free society
by abolishing economic inequality through equitable
distribution of the gains.
(4) The State shall direct its international relations
towards enhancing the dignity of the nation in the world
community by maintaining international relations on the
basis of sovereign equality, while safeguarding the
freedom,
sovereignty,
territorial
integrity
and
independence and national interest of Nepal.
51.

Policies of the State: The State shall pursue the following
policies:
(a) Policies relating to national unity and national
security:
(1)

to keep intact the national unity, while
protecting the freedom, sovereignty,
territorial integrity and independence of
Nepal,

(2)

to promote the national unity while
developing mutual cooperative relations
between the Federal Units by maintaining
mutual cohesion, harmony and solidarity
(28)

between various castes, tribes, religions,
languages, cultures and communities,
(3)

to maintain law and order by developing a
national security system,

(4)

to guarantee the overall human security
system,

(5)

to make all security organs, including the
Nepal Army, Nepal Police and Armed
Police Force Nepal, competent, strong,
professional, inclusive and accountable to
the people, on the basis of national
security policies,

(6)

to make and keep the citizens ready and
competent to serve the nation as and when
necessary,

(7)

to make proper use, in nations' interest, of
the knowledge, skills and experiences of
former public employees including
former employees, military and police.

(b) Policies relating to political and governance
system of State:
(1)

to guarantee the best interests and
prosperity of the people through
economic,
social
and
cultural
transformations, while safeguarding,
consolidating and developing political
achievements,

(2)

to maintain rule of law by protecting and
promoting human rights,

(3)

to implement international treaties,
agreements to which Nepal is a party,

(29)

(4)

to guarantee good governance by ensuring
the equal and easy access of the people to
the services and facilities delivered by the
State, while making public administration
fair, competent, impartial, transparent,
free from corruption, accountable and
participatory,

(5)

to make necessary provisions to make
mass media fair, healthy, impartial,
decent, responsible and professional,

(6)

to develop and expand harmonious and
cooperative relations between the Federal
Units
by way of sharing
of
responsibilities,
resources
and
administration between them.

(c) Policies relating to social and cultural transformation:
(1)

to build the society founded on cordial
social relations by developing a healthy
and civilized culture,

(2)

to carrying out studies, research works,
excavation and dissemination for the
protection, promotion and development of
ancient, archaeological and cultural
heritages,

(3)

to make community development through
enhancement of local public participation,
by promoting and mobilizing the
creativity of local communities in social,
cultural and service-oriented works,

(4)

to focus on the development of arts,
literature and music which form national
heritages,

(30)

(5)

to end all forms of discrimination,
inequality, exploitation and injustice in
the name of religion, custom, usage,
practice and tradition existing in the
society,

(6)

to protect and develop languages, scripts,
culture, literature, arts, motion pictures
and heritages of various castes, tribes, and
communities on the basis of equality and
co-existence, while maintaining the
cultural diversity of the country,

(7)

to pursue a multi-lingual policy.

(d) Policies relating to economy, industry and commerce:
(1)

to enhance national economy through
participation
and
independent
development of the public, private and
cooperative sectors,

(2)

to achieve economic prosperity by way of
optimum mobilization of the available
means and resources, while focusing on
the role of private sector in economy,

(3)

to promote the cooperative sector and
mobilize it in national development to the
maximum extent,

(4)

to encourage and mobilize the economic
sector
in
the
overall
national
development, while providing for
regulation
to
maintain
fairness,
accountability and competition in all of its
activities,

(31)

(5)

to make equitable distribution of the
available means and resources and
benefits of economic development,

(6)

to diversify and expand markets for goods
and services, while promoting exports
through development and expansion of
industries upon identifying areas of
comparative advantage,

(7)

to protect the interests of consumers by
maintaining trade fairness and discipline
by making national economy competitive,
while ending activities such as creating
black marketing, monopoly, artificial
scarcity and restricting competition,

(8)

to protect and promote domestic
industries and resources and accord
priority to domestic investment based on
Nepalese labour, skills and raw materials
for the development of national economy,

(9)

to give priority to domestic investment for
the development of national economy,

(10)

to encourage foreign capital and
technological investment in areas of
import substitution and export promotion,
in consonance with national interest, and
encourage and mobilize such investment
in infrastructure building,

(11)

to make the obtaining of foreign
assistance transparent, while making the
national needs and priorities as the basis
for obtaining foreign assistance, and
incorporating amounts received in form of
foreign assistance in the national budget,
(32)

(e)

(12)

to utilize knowledge, skill, technology
and capital of the non-resident Nepalese
in the national development,

(13)

to give dynamism to the economic
development by establishing coordination
between the States and the States and the
Federation in relation to industrial
corridors, special economic zones,
national projects and projects involving
foreign investment.

Policies relating to agriculture and land reforms:
(1)

to make scientific land reforms having
regard to the interests of the farmers,
while ending the dual ownership existing
in the lands,

(2)

to enhance product and productivity by
carrying out land pooling, while
discouraging absentee land ownership,

(3)

to make land management and
commercialization,
industrialization,
diversification and modernization of
agriculture, by pursuing land-use policies
to enhance agriculture product and
productivity, while protecting and
promoting the rights and interests of the
farmers,

(4)

to make proper use of lands, while
regulating and managing lands on the
basis of, inter alia, productivity, nature of
lands and ecological balance,

(5)

to provide for the farmers' access to
agricultural inputs, agro-products at fair
price and market.
(33)

(f)

Policies relating to development:
(1)

to formulate sustainable socio-economic
development strategies and programs
under the regional development plan for
inclusive economic development with
regional balance, and implement them in
a coordinative manner,

(2)

to develop balanced, environment
friendly, quality and sustainable physical
infrastructures, while according priority to
the regions lagging behind from
development perspective,

(3)

to enhance local public participation in
the process of development works,

(4)

to enhance investment in scientific study,
research works and in invention, progress
and development of science and
technology, and protect scientists,
technologists, intellectual and eminent
talents,

(5)

to ensure easy and simple access of the
general public to information technology
by developing and expanding information
technology to the tune of national needs,
and make optimum utilization of
information technology in the national
development,

(6)

to make provisions enabling the general
public to enjoy fruits of development in a
just manner, while according priority to
the indigent citizens in the distribution of
such fruits,

(34)

(7)

to develop an integrated national identity
management information system and
manage all kinds of information and data
of the citizens in an integrated manner,
and linking such system with the services
and facilities provided by the State and
with national development plans,

(8)

to update demographic statistics and
linking it with national development
plans.

(g) Policies relating to protection, promotion and
use of natural resources:
(1)

to
protect, promote,
and
make
environmental friendly and sustainable
use of, natural resources available in the
country, in consonance with national
interest and adopting the concept of intergenerational equity, and make equitable
distribution of fruits, according priority
and preferential right to the local
communities,

(2)

to make multi-purpose development of
water resources, while according priority
to domestic investment based on public
participation,

(3)

to ensure reliable supply of energy in an
affordable and easy manner, and make
proper use of energy, for the fulfilment of
the basic needs of citizens, by generating
and developing renewable energy,

(4)

to develop sustainable and reliable
irrigation by making control of waterinduced disasters, and river management,
(35)

(h)

(5)

to conserve, promote, and make
sustainable use of, forests, wildlife, birds,
vegetation
and
bio-diversity,
by
mitigating possible risks to environment
from industrial and physical development,
while raising awareness of general public
about environment cleanliness,

(6)

to maintain the forest area in necessary
lands for ecological balance,

(7)

to adopt appropriate measures to abolish
or mitigate existing or possible adverse
environmental impacts on the nature,
environment or biological diversity,

(8)

to
pursue
the
principles
of
environmentally sustainable development
such as the principles of polluter pays, of
precaution in environmental protection
and of prior informed consent.

(9)

to make advance warning, preparedness,
rescue, relief and rehabilitation in order to
mitigate risks from natural disasters.

Policies relating to basic needs of citizens:
(1)

to prepare human resources that are
competent, competitive, ethical, and
devoted to national interests, while
making education scientific, technical,
vocational, empirical, employment and
people-oriented,

(2)

to make private sector investment made in
education service-oriented by regulating
and managing such investment, while
enhancing the State's investment in the
education sector,
(36)

(3)

to make higher education easy, qualitative
and accessible, and free gradually,

(4)

to establish and promote community
information centres and libraries for the
personality development of citizens,

(5)

to keep on enhancing investment
necessary in the public health sector by
the State in order to make the citizens
healthy,

(6)

to ensure easy, convenient and equal
access of all to quality health services,

(7)

to protect and promote health systems
including Ayurveda, as a traditional
medical system of Nepal, natural therapy
and homeopathy system,

(8)

to make private sector investment in the
health
sector
service-oriented
by
regulating and managing such investment,
while enhancing the State's investment in
this sector,

(9)

to focus on health research and keep on
increasing the number of health
institutions and health workers in order to
make health services widely available and
qualitative,

(10)

to increase average life expectancy by
reducing maternal and infant mortality
rate, while encouraging family planning
for population management on the basis
of Nepal's capacity and need,

(37)

(i)

(11)

to manage unplanned settlement and
develop
planned
and
systematic
settlement,

(12)

to provide for sustainable production,
supplies, storage, security, and easy and
effective distribution of foods by
encouraging food production in tune with
climate and soil, in consonance with the
concept of food sovereignty, while
enhancing investment in the agriculture
sector,

(13)

to ensure planned supply system by
according special priority to the remote
and backward regions, while ensuring
equal access of all citizens to basic goods
and services,

(14)

to
enhance
investment
in
the
transportation sector, while ensuring
simple, easy and equal access of the
citizens to transportation facilities, and to
make the transportation sector safe,
systematic and persons with disabilities
friendly
by
encouraging
public
transportation and regulating private
transportation, while according priority to
the environment friendly technologies,

(15)

to arrange for access to medical treatment
while ensuring citizen's health insurance.

Policies relating to labour and employment:
(1)

to make competent and professional the
labour force that has remained as the main
socio-economic strength of the country
and enhance employment within the
(38)

country, while ensuring
enabling all to work,

(j)

a

situation

(2)

to guarantee social security, while
ensuring the basic rights of all labours, in
consonance with the concept of decent
labour,

(3)

to abolish all forms of labour exploitation
including child labour,

(4)

to encourage participation of labours in
management, while maintain cordial
relations between the labours and
entrepreneurs,

(5)

to regulate and manage the sector in order
to make foreign employment free from
exploitation, safe and systematic and to
guarantee employment and rights of the
labours,

(6)

to encourage to mobilize the capital,
skills, technology and experience gained
from foreign employment in productive
sectors in the country.

Policies relating to social justice and inclusion:
(1)

to keep on making appropriate
arrangements for the livelihoods of the
helpless single women, while according
priority to them in employment on the
basis of skills, competency and
qualification,

(2)

to make self-dependent the women who
are vulnerable, subjected to social and
family exclusion and victims of violence

(39)

self-reliant by making their rehabilitation,
protection and empowerment,
(3)

to ensure enjoyment of requisite services
and facilities at the reproductive stage,

(4)

to evaluate economically the work and
contribution such as maintenance of
children and care of families,

(5)

to take into consideration primarily of the
best interests of the child,

(6)

to identify the freed bonded labours,
Kamlari, Harawa, Charawa, tillers,
landless, squatters and rehabilitate them
by providing housing, housing plot for
residence and cultivable land or
employment for their livelihoods,

(7)

to create an atmosphere conducive to the
full enjoyment of the political, economic,
social and cultural rights, while enhancing
the participation of youths in national
development, to make their personality
development, while providing special
opportunity in areas including education,
health and employment for the
empowerment and development of the
youths and provide them with appropriate
opportunities for the overall development
of the State,

(8)

to make the indigenous nationalities
participate in decisions concerning that
community by making special provisions
for opportunities and benefits in order to
ensure the right of these nationalities to
live with dignity, along with their identity,
(40)

and protect and promote traditional
knowledge, skill, culture, social tradition
and experience of the indigenous
nationalities and local communities,
(9)

to
make special provisions for
opportunities and benefits to minority
communities to enjoy social and cultural
rights, with maintaining their identity,

(10)

to make special provisions for equal
distribution of economic, social and
cultural opportunities and benefits to the
Madhesi community, Muslims and
backward class, and for opportunities and
benefits to the indigent citizens within
such communities for their protection,
upliftment, empowerment and development,

(11)

to
make special provisions for
opportunities and benefits for the
protection, upliftment, empowerment and
development of the citizens of the
oppressed and backward regions and for
the fulfilment of their basic needs,

(12)

to accord priority to the indigent within
all sexes, regions and communities in the
provision of social security and social
justice,

(13)

to make planned investment in sports and
sport-persons in order to prepare healthy,
competent and disciplined citizens, and to
develop sports as a means of
consolidating
national
unity
and
enhancing national prestige at the
international level,

(41)

(14)

(k)

to adopt a single door system for the
establishment, approval, operation, regulation
and management of community-based
and national or international nongovernmental organizations and to
involve such organizations only in the
sectors of national need and priority,
while making investment and role of such
organizations transparent and accountable.

Policies relating to justice and penal system:
(1)

to make the administration of justice
speedy, efficient, widely available,
economical, impartial, effective, and
accountable to people,

(2)

to pursue alternative means such as
mediation and arbitration for the
settlement of disputes of general nature,

(3)

to adopt effective measures for the control
of corruption and irregularities in all
sectors including political, administrative,
judicial and social sectors.

(l)

Policies relating to tourism: To develop ecofriendly tourism industries as an important base
of national economy by way of identification,
protection, promotion and publicity of the ancient,
cultural, religious, archaeological and natural
heritages of Nepal, to make environment and
policy required for the development of tourism
culture, and to accord priority to local people in
the distribution of benefits of tourism industries.

(m)

Policies relating to international relations:
(1)

to conduct an independent foreign policy
based on the Charter of the United
(42)

Nations, non-alignment, principles of
Panchsheel, international law and the
norms of world peace, taking into
consideration of the overall interest of the
nation, while remaining active in
safeguarding the sovereignty, territorial
integrity, independence and national
interest of Nepal,
(2)

to review treaties concluded in the past,
and make treaties, agreements based on
equality and mutual interest.

52.

Obligations of the State: It shall be the obligation of the
State to make Nepal a prosperous and affluent country
by protecting and promoting fundamental rights and
human rights, pursuing directive principles of the State
and gradually implementing policies of the State, while
keeping intact the freedom, sovereignty, territorial
integrity and independence of Nepal.

53.

To submit report: The Government of Nepal shall submit
an annual report containing the steps taken and
achievements made in the implementation of the
directive principles, policies and obligations of the State
set forth in this Part to the President, and the President
shall cause such report to be laid through the Prime
Minister before the Federal Parliament.

54.

Provisions relating to monitoring: There shall be a
committee, in accordance with law, in the Federal
Parliament in order to monitor and evaluate whether the
directive principles, policies and obligations of the State
set forth in this Part have been implemented
progressively or not.

55.

Questions not to be raised in court: No question shall be
raised in any court as to whether any matter contained in
this Part has been implemented or not.
(43)

Part-5
Structure of State and Distribution of State Power
56.

Structure of State: (1) The main structure of the Federal
Democratic Republic of Nepal shall be of three levels,
namely the Federation, the State and the Local level.
(2) The Federation, State and Local levels shall
exercise the power of State of Nepal pursuant to this
Constitution and law.
(3) There shall be States consisting of the
Districts as mentioned in Schedule-4 existing in Nepal at
the time of commencement of this Constitution.
(4) There shall be Village Bodies, Municipalities
and District Assemblies under the Local level. The
number of Wards in a Village Body and Municipality
shall be as provided for in the Federal law.
(5) Any Special, Protected or Autonomous
Region can be set by the Federal law for social, cultural
protection or economic development.
(6) The Federation, State and Local levels shall
protect Nepal's freedom, sovereignty, territorial integrity,
independence, national interest, overall development,
multi-party, competitive, democratic, republican, federal
system of governance, human rights and fundamental
rights, rule of law, separation of powers and check and
balance, egalitarian society based on pluralism and
equality, inclusive representation and identity.

57.

Distribution of State power: (1) The powers of the
Federation shall be vested in the matters enumerated in
Schedule-5, and such powers shall be exercised pursuant
to this Constitution and the Federal law.
(2) The powers of a State shall be vested in the
matters enumerated in Schedule-6, and such powers shall
(44)

be exercised pursuant to this Constitution and the State
law.
(3) The concurrent powers of the Federation and
the State shall be vested in the matters enumerated in
Schedule-7, and such powers shall be exercised pursuant
to this Constitution, the Federal law and the State law.
(4) The powers of the Local level shall be vested
in the matters enumerated in Schedule-8, and such
powers shall be exercised pursuant to this Constitution
and the law made by the Village Assembly or Municipal
Assembly.
(5) The concurrent powers of the Federation,
State and Local levels shall be vested in the matters
enumerated in Schedule-9, and such powers shall be
exercised pursuant to this Constitution, the Federal law,
the State law and the law made by the Village Assembly
or Municipal Assembly.
(6) Any law to be made by the State Assembly,
Village Assembly or Municipal Assembly pursuant to
clause (3) or (5) shall be so made as not to be
inconsistent with the Federal law, and any law made by
the State Assembly, Village Assembly or Municipal
Assembly which is inconsistent with the Federal law
shall be invalid to the extent of such inconsistency.
(7) Any law to be made by the Village Assembly
or Municipal Assembly pursuant to clause (5) shall be so
made as not to be inconsistent with the State law, and
any law made by the Village Assembly or Municipal
Assembly which is inconsistent with the State law shall
be invalid to the extent of such inconsistency.
58.

Residual powers: The Federation shall have power on
any matter not enumerated in the Federal List, State List,
List of Local level or Concurrent List or on any matter
(45)

which is not so specified in this Constitution as to be
exercised by any level.
59.

Exercise of financial powers: (1) The Federation, State
and Local level shall make laws, make annual budget,
decisions, formulate and implement policies and plans
on any matters related to financial powers within their
respective jurisdictions.
(2) The Federation may so make necessary
policies, standards and laws on any of the matters
enumerated in the Concurrent List and other areas of
financial powers as to be applicable also to the States.
(3) The Federation, State and Local level shall
make budget of their respective levels, and the time for
submission of budget by the State and Local level shall
be as provided for in the Federal law.
(4) The Federation, State and Local level shall
provide for the equitable distribution of benefits derived
from the use of natural resources or development.
Certain portions of such benefits shall be distributed,
pursuant to law, in forms of royalty, services or goods to
the project affected regions and local communities.
(5) If, in utilising natural resources, the local
community desires to make investment therein, the
Federation, State and Local level shall accord priority to
such investment in such portion as provided by law on
the basis of the nature and size of such investment.
(6) The Government of Nepal shall have power to
obtain foreign assistance and borrow loans. Such
assistance or loans shall be so obtained or borrowed as to
have macro-economic stability of the country.
(7) Provisions relating to the management of
budget deficits and other fiscal discipline of the

(46)

Federation, State and Local level shall be as provided for
in the Federal law.
60.

Distribution of sources of revenue: (1) The Federation,
State and Local level may impose taxes on matters
falling within their respective jurisdiction and collect
revenue from these sources.
Provided that provisions relating to the
imposition of taxes and collection of revenue on matters
that fall within the Concurrent List and on matters that
are not included in the List of any level shall be as
determined by the Government of Nepal.
(2) The Government of Nepal shall make
provisions for the equitable distribution of the collected
revenue to the Federation, State and Local level.
(3) The amount of fiscal transfer receivable by
the State and Local level shall be as recommended by the
National Natural Resources and Fiscal Commission.
(4) The Government of Nepal shall, on the basis
of the need of expenditure and revenue capacity,
distribute fiscal equalization grants to the State and
Local level.
(5) Each State shall, in accordance with the State
law, distribute fiscal equalization grants out of the grants
received from the Government of Nepal and revenues
collected from its sources, on the basis of the need of
expenditure and revenue capacity of its subordinate
Local level.
(6) Provisions relating to distribution of
conditional grants, complementary grants or special
grants for other purposes to be provided by the
Government of Nepal from the Federal Consolidated
Fund shall be as provided for in the Federal law.

(47)

(7) Distribution of revenues between the Federal,
State and Local level shall be made in a balanced and
transparent manner.
(8) A Federal Act on the distribution of revenues
shall be made having regard to the national policies,
national requirements, autonomy of the State and Local
levels, services to be rendered by the State and the Local
level to the people and financial powers granted to them,
capacity to collect revenues, potentiality and use of
revenues, assistance to be made in development works,
reduction of regional imbalances, poverty and inequality,
end of deprivation, and assistance to be made in the
performance of contingent works and fulfilment of
temporary needs.

(48)

61.

62.

Part-6
President and Vice-President
President: (1) There shall be a President of Nepal.
(2) The President shall be the head of state of
Nepal. He or she shall perform his or her functions in
accordance with this Constitution and the Federal law.
(3) The President shall promote the national unity
of Nepal.
(4) The main duty of the President shall be to
abide by and protect this Constitution.
Election of President: (1) The President shall be elected
by an electoral college composed of the members of the
Federal Parliament and of the State Assemblies. The
voting weightage of the members of the Federal
Parliament and of the State Assemblies shall vary as
provided for in the Federal law.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in clause
(1), nothing shall be deemed to bar the formation of an
electoral college for the purpose of election to the
President by the sole reason that election to the State
Assembly has not been held in any State.
(3) A person who secures a majority of the then
existing total votes of the electoral college under clause
(1) shall be elected as the President.
(4) If none of the candidates secures a majority
under clause (3), there shall be voting between the two
candidates who have secured the highest number of
votes, and a candidate who secures more than fifty
percent of the total votes in such a voting shall be elected
as the President.
(5) If none of the candidates secures more than
fifty percent of the total votes even in the voting under
clause (4), re-voting shall be held. A candidate who
(49)

secures a majority of the total valid votes cast in such
voting shall be elected as the President.
(6) If a person who holds a political office to be
filled by way of election, nomination or appointment is
appointed as the President under this Article, his or her
such office shall ipso facto be vacant.
(7) Election to the President and other matters
related thereto shall be as provided for in the Federal law.
63.

Term of office of President: (1) The term of office of the
President shall be five years from the date on which he
or she is so elected.
(2) The President whose term of office under
clause (1) has expired shall continue to discharge the
functions under this Constitution until another elected
President assumes his or her office.

64.

Qualification for President: (1) A person who has the
following qualification shall be qualified to become the
President:
(a)

being qualified to become a member of
the Federal Parliament,

(b)

having completed the age of at least
forty five years, and

(c)

not being disqualified by any law.

(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in clause
(1), a person who has already been elected twice as the
President shall not become a candidate in the election to
the President.
65.

Vacation of office of President: The office of the
President shall become vacant in any of the following
circumstances:
(a)

if he or she tenders resignation in writing to
the Vice-President,
(50)

66.

(b)

if a motion of impeachment against him or
her is passed under Article 101,

(c)

if his or her term of office expires,

(d)

If he or she dies.

Functions, duties and powers of President: (1) The
President shall exercise such powers and perform such
duties as conferred to him or her pursuant to this
Constitution or a Federal law.
(2) In exercising the powers or duties under
clause (1), the President shall perform all other functions
to be performed by him or her on recommendation and
with the consent of the Council of Ministers than those
functions specifically provided to be performed on
recommendation of any body or official under this
Constitution or Federal Law. Such recommendation and
consent shall be submitted through the Prime Minister.
(3) Any decision or order to be issued in the
name of the President under clause (2) and other
instrument of authorization pertaining thereto shall be
authenticated as provided for in the Federal law.

67.

Vice-President: (1) There shall be a Vice-president of Nepal.
(2) The functions to be performed by the
President shall be performed by the Vice-president
during the absence of the President.
(3) If a person who holds a political office to be
filled by way of election, nomination or appointment is
appointed as the Vice-president, his or her such office
shall ipso facto be vacant.

68.

Vacation of office of Vice-president: The office of the
Vice-president shall become vacant in any of the
following circumstances:

(51)

(a)

if he or she tenders resignation in writing to
the President,

(b)

if a motion of impeachment against him or
her is passed under Article 101,

(c)

if his or her term of office expires,

(d)

if he or she dies.

69.

Other provisions relating to Vice-President: Provisions
relating to the qualification, procedures of election and
term of office of the Vice-President shall be the same as
that of the President.

70.

President and Vice-President to be from different sex or
community: Election to the President and the Vicepresident under this Constitution shall be so made as to
have representation of different sex or community.

71.

Oath by President and Vice-President: Prior to assuming
their respective offices, the President shall take an oath
of office and secrecy before the Chief Justice, and the
Vice-President, before the President, as provided for in
the Federal law.

72.

Remuneration and facilities of President and VicePresident: The remuneration and other facilities of the
President and the Vice-president shall be as provided for
in the Federal Act, and as specified by the Government
of Nepal until such Act is made.

73.

Office of President and Vice-President: (1) There shall
be separate offices for the performance of the functions
of the President and the Vice-President.
(2) The Government of Nepal shall make
arrangements for employees and other provisions as
required to perform the functions of the offices under
clause (1).

(52)

Part-7
Federal Executive
74.

Form of government: The form of government of Nepal
shall be multi-party, competitive, federal, democratic,
republican, parliamentary form of government based on
pluralism.

75.

Executive power: (1) The executive power of Nepal
shall, pursuant to this Constitution and law, be vested in
the Council of Ministers.
(2) The responsibility for issuing general
directives, controlling and regulating the governance of
Nepal shall, subject to this Constitution and law, lie in
the Council of Ministers.
(3) All Federal executive functions of Nepal shall
be performed in the name of the Government of Nepal.
(4) Any decision or order to be issued in the
name of the Government of Nepal pursuant to clause (3)
and other instruments of authorization pertaining thereto
shall be authenticated as provided for in the Federal law.

76.

Constitution of Council of Ministers: (1) The President
shall appoint the leader of a parliamentary party that
commands majority in the House of Representatives as
the Prime Minister, and the Council of Ministers shall be
constituted under his or her chairpersonship.
(2) In cases where no party has a clear majority
in the House of Representatives under clause (1), the
President shall appoint as the Prime Minister a member
of the House of Representatives who can command
majority with the support of two or more parties
representing to the House of Representatives.
(3) In cases where Prime Minister cannot be
appointed under clause (2) no later than thirty days after
(53)

the date of declaration of the final results of election to
the House of Representatives or the Prime Minister so
appointed fails to secure a vote of confidence under
clause (4), the President shall appoint as the Prime
Minister the parliamentary party leader of the party
which has the highest number of members in the House
of Representatives.
(4) The Prime Minister appointed under clause
(2) or (3) shall obtain a vote of confidence from the
House of Representatives no later than thirty days after
the date of such appointment.
(5) In cases where the Prime Minister appointed
under clause (3) fails to obtain a vote of confidence
under clause (4) and any member under clause (2)
presents a ground on which he or she can obtain a vote
of confidence in the House of Representatives, the
President shall appoint such member as the Prime
Minister.
(6) The Prime Minister appointed under clause
(5) must obtain a vote of confidence under clause (4).
(7) In cases where the Prime Minister appointed
under clause (5) fails to obtain a vote of confidence or
the Prime Minister cannot be appointed, the President
shall, on recommendation of the Prime Minister, dissolve
the House of Representatives and appoint a date of
election so that the election to another House of
Representatives is completed within six months.
(8) Procedures on the appointment of the Prime
Minister under this Article must be completed no later
than thirty five days after the date of declaration of the
final results of election to the House of Representatives
held under this Constitution or the date on which the
office of the Prime Minister has fallen vacant.

(54)

(9) The President shall, on recommendation of
the Prime Minister, constitute the Council of Ministers
comprising a maximum of twenty five Ministers
including the Prime Minister, in accordance with the
inclusive principle, from amongst the members of the
Federal Parliament.
Explanation: For the purposes of this Article, "Minister"
means a Deputy Prime Minister, Minister, Minister of
State and Assistant Minister.
(10) The Prime Minister and Ministers shall be
collectively responsible to the Federal Parliament, and
the Ministers shall be individually responsible for the
work of their respective Ministries to the Prime Minister
and the Federal Parliament.
77.

Vacation of office of Prime Minister and Minister: (1)
The office of the Prime Minister shall be vacant in any of
the following circumstances:
(a)

if he or she tenders resignation in writing
to the President,

(b)

if a vote of confidence is not passed or a
vote of no-confidence is passed against
him or her under Article 100,

(c)

if he or she ceases to be a member of the
House of Representatives,

(d)

if he or she dies.

(2) The office of a Minister shall be vacant in any
of the following circumstances:
(a)

if he or she tenders resignation in writing
to the Prime Minister,

(b)

if the Prime Minister removes him or her
from office,
(55)

(c)

if the office of Prime Minister falls
vacant under sub-clause (a), (b) or (c) of
clause (1),

(d)

if he or she dies.

(3) If the office of Prime Minister falls vacant
under clause (1), the same Council of Ministers shall
continue to act until another Council of Ministers is
constituted.
Provided that if the Prime Minister dies, the
senior-most Minister shall act as the Prime Minister until
a new Prime Minister is appointed.
78.

Non-member of Federal Parliament to be Minister: (1)
Notwithstanding anything contained in clause (9) of
Article 76, the President may, on recommendation of the
Prime Minister, appoint a person who is not a member of
the Federal Parliament as a Minister
(2) A Minister appointed under clause (1) must
obtain membership of the Federal Parliament within six
months from the date of taking oath by him or her.
(3) In the event of failure to obtain membership
of the Federal Parliament within the period mentioned in
clause (2), he or she shall not be qualified to be
reappointed to the office of Minister during the term of
the then House of Representatives.
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in clause
(1), a person who has been defeated in the election to the
then House of Representatives shall not be qualified to
be appointed to the office of Minister as mentioned in
clause (1) during the term of such House of Representatives.

79.

Remuneration and other facilities of Prime Minister and
Ministers: The remuneration and other facilities of the
Prime Minister and Ministers shall be as provided for in
(56)

the Federal Act, and shall be as specified by the
Government of Nepal until such Act is made.
80.

Oath: The Prime Minister, Deputy Prime Minister and
Ministers shall take an oath of office and secrecy before
the President, and Ministers of State and Assistant
Ministers, before the Prime Minister, as provided for in
the Federal law, prior to assuming their respective
offices.

81.

To inform President: The Prime Minister shall inform the
President about the following matters:

82.

(a)

resolutions of the Council of Ministers,

(b)

Bills to be introduced in the Federal
Parliament,

(c)

such other necessary information as
commanded by the President on matters set
forth in clauses (a) and (b), and

(d)

current general state of affairs of the
country and matters concerning foreign
relations.

Transaction of business of Government of Nepal: (1)
The business of the Government of Nepal shall be
allocated and transacted in accordance with the rules
approved by the Government of Nepal.
(2) No question may be raised in any court as to
whether or not the rules under clause (1) have been
observed.

(57)

Part-8
Federal Legislature
83.

Federal Legislature: There shall be a Federal Legislature
consisting of two Houses to be known as the House of
Representatives and the National Assembly, which shall
be called as the Federal Parliament.

84.

Composition of House of Representatives: (1) The
House of Representatives shall consist of a total of two
hundred and seventy five members, as follows:
(a)

One hundred and sixty five members to
be elected through the first past the
post electoral system, with one being
elected from each election constituency
of one hundred and sixty five election
constituencies delimited in the country

on the basis of population, and
geographical
convenience
and
specificity;

(b)

One hundred and ten members to be
elected through the proportional electoral
system where voters vote for political
parties, with the whole country being
considered as a single election
constituency.

(2) The Federal law shall provide that, in fielding
candidacy by political parties for the election to the
House of Representatives under the proportional
electoral system, representation shall be ensured on the
basis of a closed list also from women, Dalit, indigenous
peoples, Khas Arya, Madhesi, Tharu, Muslims and



Amended by the First Amendment.
(58)

backward regions, on the basis of population. In so
fielding candidacy, regard shall also be had to geography
and territorial balance.
Explanation: For the purposes of this clause, "Khas
Arya" means Kshetri, Brahmin, Thakuri, Sanyasi
(Dashnami) community.
(3) In fielding candidacy under clause (2),
political parties shall provide for representation of the
persons with disabilities as well.
(4) Election to the House of Representatives
under clause (1) shall be held through secret ballots in
accordance with law.
(5) Each citizen of Nepal who has completed the
age of eighteen years shall have the right to vote in any
one election constituency as provided for in the Federal
law.
(6) A person who is qualified under Article 87
and entitled to vote in an election to the members of the
House of Representatives may, subject to the Federal
law, be a candidate in any election constituency.
Provided that a person shall not be a candidate in
more than one election constituencies at the same time.
(7) If the seat of any member of the House of
Representatives falls vacant while its term still remains
for more than six months, the vacancy shall be filled in
the same manner of electoral system as in which such
seat was filled in.
(8)
Notwithstanding anything contained
elsewhere in this Part, at least one third of the total
number of members elected from each political party
representing in the Federal Parliament must be women.
If women are not so elected as to constitute one third of
(59)

the elected members of any political party under subclause (a) of clause (1) and sub-clause (a) of clause (2) of
Article 86, such political party must, in electing
members under sub-clause (b) of clause (1), so elect that
women members constitute at least one third of the total
number of members elected to the Federal Parliament
from that party.
(9) Election to the House of Representatives and
other matters pertaining thereto shall be as provided for
in the Federal law.
85.

Term of House of Representatives: (1) Unless dissolved
earlier pursuant to this Constitution, the term of the
House of Representatives shall be five years.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in clause
(1), the term of the House of Representatives may be
extended by a Federal Act for a period not exceeding one
year in cases where a proclamation or order of a state of
emergency is in effect.
(3) The term of the House of Representatives
extended under clause (2) shall ipso facto expire upon
the expiry of six months from the date of voidance of the
proclamation or order of the state of emergency.

86.

Composition of National Assembly and term of office of
its members: (1) The National Assembly shall be a
permanent House.
(2) The National Assembly shall consist of fifty
nine members as follows:
(a)

fifty six elected members consisting of at
least three women, one Dalit and one
from persons with disabilities or
minorities, from each State by an
electoral college composed of members
of the State Assembly, chairpersons and
(60)

vice-chairpersons of the Village Bodies,
and Mayors and Deputy-Mayors of the
Municipalities, with different weightage
of vote by members of the State
Assembly, chairpersons and vicechairpersons of the Village Bodies, and
Mayors and Deputy-Mayors of the
Municipalities, as provided for in the
Federal law,
(b)

Three members consisting of at least one
woman nominated by the President on
recommendation of the Government of
Nepal.

(3) The term of office of the members of the
National Assembly shall be six years. The term of office
of one third of the members of the National Assembly
shall expire in every two years.
Provided that, for the first time, after the
commencement of this Constitution, arrangements shall
be made by drawing lots to retire one-third of the
members on the expiry of two years, another one-third
on the expiry of four years, and the final one-third on the
expiry of six years.
(4) In computing the term of office of the
members of the National Assembly for the first time
after the commencement of this Constitution, the term of
office of all members shall be deemed to have
commenced on the day on which the first session of the
National Assembly is held.
(5) Any vacancy of seat in the National
Assembly shall be filled for the remainder of the term of
office in the same manner of election or nomination as in
which the seat of the vacating member was filled.

(61)

(6) Other matters relating to election to the
members of the National Assembly shall be as provided
for in the Federal law.
87.

Qualification for member: (1) A person who has the
following qualification shall be qualified to become a
member of the Federal Parliament:
(a)

being a citizen of Nepal,

(b)

having completed the age of twenty five
years, for the House of Representatives, and
the age of thirty five years, for the National
Assembly,

(c)

not having been convicted of a criminal
offense involving moral turpitude,

(d)

not being disqualified by any Federal law,
and

(e)

not holding any office of profit.

Explanation: For the purposes of this clause, "office of
profit" means any position, other than a political position
which is to be filled by election or nomination, for which
a remuneration or economic benefit is paid out of a
government fund.
(2) No person may be a member of both Houses
at the same time.
(3) If a person who holds a political office to be
filled by way of election, nomination or appointment is
elected or nominated as a member of the Federal
Parliament under this Part, his or her such office shall
ipso facto be vacant from the day on which he or she
takes an oath of office of member of the Federal
Parliament.
88.

Oath: Every member of each House of the Federal
Parliament must, before taking part for the first time in
(62)

the session of the House or any of its committees, take
an oath as provided for in the Federal law.
89.

Vacation of seat: The seat of a member of the Federal
Parliament shall become vacant in any of the following
circumstances:
(a)

if he or she tenders resignation in writing
before the Speaker or Chairperson,

(b)

if he or she is no longer qualified or ceases
to possess the qualification under Article
87,

(c)

if the term of the House of Representatives
or the term of office of the member of the
National Assembly expires,

(d)

if he or she absents himself or herself from
ten consecutive meetings, without giving
notice to the concerned House,

(e)

if the political party of which he or she was
a member when elected provides a
notification in accordance with the Federal
law that he or she has defected from the
party,

(f)

if he or she dies.

90.

Decision as to disqualification of member: If a question
arises as to whether any member of the Federal
Parliament is disqualified or has become disqualified
under Article 87, the Constitutional Bench of the
Supreme Court shall finally decide that question.

91.

Speaker and Deputy Speaker of House of
Representatives: (1) The members of the House of
Representatives shall, not later than fifteen days of the
date of holding of the first meeting of the House of

(63)

Representatives, elect a Speaker and a Deputy Speaker
from amongst themselves.
(2) Election under clause (1) shall be so held that
there is one woman out of the Speaker and the Deputy
Speaker, and the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker of the
House of Representatives shall be representatives from
different parties.
Provided that if there is no representation of more
than one party in the House of Representatives or no
candidacy is filed by more than one party in spite of
representation, nothing shall prevent the members of the
same party from being the Speaker and the Deputy
Speaker of the House of Representatives.
(3) If the office of the Speaker or the Deputy
Speaker falls vacant, the members of the House of
Representatives shall fill the vacancy by electing the
Speaker or Deputy Speaker from amongst themselves.
(4) The Deputy Speaker shall, in the absence of
the Speaker, chair the House of Representatives.
(5) If election to the Speaker and the Deputy
Speaker is not held or if both the positions become
vacant, the attending member who is by age the seniormost shall chair the meeting of the House of
Representatives.
(6) The office of the Speaker or Deputy Speaker
of the House of Representatives shall become vacant in
any of the following circumstances:
(a)

if he or she ceases to be a member of the
House of Representatives,
Provided that, in the event of dissolution
of the House of Representatives, the
Speaker and the Deputy Speaker of the
(64)

House of Representatives holding their
respective offices shall continue in office
until the previous day of the filing of
nominations for another election to the
House of Representatives,
(b)

if he or she tenders resignation in
writing,

(c)

if a resolution is passed by a majority of
two-thirds of the total number of the then
members
of
the
House
of
Representatives that his or her conduct is
not compatible with his or her office.

(7) The Deputy Speaker shall chair a meeting at
which deliberations are to be held on a resolution that the
conduct of the Speaker of the House of Representatives
is not compatible with his or her office. The Speaker of
the House of Representatives may take part and vote in
the deliberations on such resolution.
92.

Chairperson and Vice-Chairperson of National
Assembly: (1) The members of the National Assembly
shall, not later than fifteen days of the date of holding of
its first meeting, elect the Chairperson and the ViceChairperson of the National Assembly from amongst
themselves.
(2) Election under clause (1) shall be so held that
there is one woman out of the Chairperson and the ViceChairperson of the National Assembly.
(3) If the office of the Chairperson or ViceChairperson of the National Assembly falls vacant, the
members of the National Assembly shall fill the vacancy
by electing its Chairperson or Vice-Chairperson from
amongst themselves.

(65)

(4) The Vice-Chairperson of the National
Assembly shall, in the absence of its Chairperson, chair
the National Assembly.
(5) If the election to the Chairperson and the
Vice-Chairperson of the National Assembly is not held
or if both the positions becomes vacant, the member who
is by age the senior-most out of the attending members
shall chair the meeting of the National Assembly.
(6) The office of the Chairperson or ViceChairperson of the National Assembly shall become
vacant in any of the following circumstances:
(a)

if he or she ceases to be a member of the
National Assembly,

(b)

if he or she tenders resignation in
writing,

(c)

if a resolution is passed by a majority of
two-thirds of the total number of the then
members of the National Assembly that
his or her conduct is not compatible with
his or her office.

(7) The Vice-Chairperson of the National
Assembly shall chair a meeting at which deliberations
are to be held on a resolution that the conduct of the
Chairperson of the National Assembly is not compatible
with his or her office. The Chairperson of the National
Assembly may take part and vote in the deliberations on
such resolution.
93.

Summoning and prorogation of session: (1) The
President shall summon a session of the Federal
Parliament within thirty days of the declaration of final
results of the election to the House of Representatives.
Thereafter, the President shall, from time to time,

(66)

summon sessions of both or either of the Houses
pursuant to this Constitution.
Provided that the interval between the two
consecutive sessions shall not exceed six months.
(2) The President may prorogue the sessions of
both or either of the Houses of the Federal Parliament.
(3) If, during the prorogation or recess of the
session of the House of Representatives, one-fourth of
the total number of its members write a petition that it is
desirable to convene a session or meeting, the President
shall specify the date and time for such session or
meeting. The House of Representatives shall meet or
commence its session at the date and time so specified.
94.

Quorum: Except as otherwise provided in this
Constitution, no question or resolution shall be presented
for decision in a meeting of either House of the Federal
Parliament unless one-fourth of the total number of its
members are present.

95.

Address by President: (1) The President may address
either a meeting of any House or a joint sitting of both
Houses of the Federal Parliament, and summon the
members for that purpose.
(2) The President shall address the first session
after election to the House of Representatives and a joint
sitting of both Houses of the Federal Parliament after the
commencement of the first session of each year.

96.

Deputy Prime Minister, Minister, Minister of State and
Assistant Minister entitled to take part in both Houses:
The Deputy Prime Minister, Minister, Minister of State
and Assistant Minister shall be entitled to attend and take
part in the proceedings and deliberations of either House
of the Federal Parliament or its committees.

(67)

Provided that he or she shall not be entitled to
vote in a House or its committee of which he or she is
not a member.

97.

Formation of committees: (1) The House of
Representatives and the National Assembly may form
committees as provided for in the Federal law.
(2) If a resolution is passed by either House
demanding that a joint committee of both the Houses be
formed for the purpose of managing the working
procedures between the two Houses of the Federal
Parliament, resolving disagreement on any Bill or for
any other specified function, the joint committee shall be
formed. The joint committee shall consist of a maximum
of twenty five members in the ratio of five members
from the House of Representatives to one member from
the National Assembly on the basis of inclusion.

98.

Transaction of business in case of vacancy in seat of
member: Either House of the Federal Parliament shall
have the power to transact its business notwithstanding
any vacancy in the seat of its member. No proceedings of
either House of the Federal Parliament shall become
invalid even if it is subsequently discovered that a person
who was not so entitled took part in such proceedings.

99.

Voting: Except as otherwise provided in this
Constitution, any motions submitted for decision in
either House of the Federal Parliament shall be decided
by a majority vote of the members present and voting.
The member chairing the meeting shall not have the right
to vote.
Provided that he or she may cast vote in the case
of a tie.
(68)

100.

Provisions relating to vote of confidence and motion of
no-confidence: (1) The Prime Minister may, whenever
he or she considers necessary or appropriate to show that
he or she has confidence from the House of
Representatives, table a motion to that effect in the
House of Representatives for the vote of confidence.
(2) If the political party which the Prime Minister
represents is divided or a political party in coalition
government withdraws its support, the Prime Minister
shall table a motion in the House of Representatives for a
vote of confidence within thirty days.
(3) If a motion tabled under clauses (1) and (2) is
not passed by a majority of the total number of the then
members of the House of Representatives, the Prime
Minister shall relieve of his or her office.
(4) One-fourth of the total number of the then
members of the House of Representatives may table a
motion of no-confidence in writing that the House has no
confidence in the Prime Minister.
Provided that a motion of no confidence shall not
be tabled until the first two years after the appointment
of the Prime Minister and until another one year after the
date of failure of the motion of no confidence once
tabled.
(5) A motion of no confidence to be tabled under
clause (4) shall also indicate the name of a member
proposed for the Prime Minister.
(6) If a motion of no confidence tabled under
clause (4) is passed by a majority of the total number of
the then members of the House of Representatives, the
Prime Minister shall relieve of his or her office.
(7) If the office of Prime Minister falls vacant
because of the passage of a motion of no confidence
(69)

under clause (6), the President shall, in accordance with
Article 76, appoint as the Prime Minister the member of
the House of Representatives proposed under clause (5).
101.

Impeachment: (1) One fourth of the total number of the
then members of the House of Representatives may
move a motion of impeachment against the President or
Vice-President on the ground of serious violation of this
Constitution and the Federal law. If the motion is passed
by at least two thirds majority of the total number of the
then members of both Houses of the Federal Parliament,
he or she shall relive of his or her office.
(2) One fourth of the total number of the then
members of the House of Representatives may move a
motion of impeachment against the Chief Justice of
Nepal or a Judge of the Supreme Court, member of the
Judicial Council, chief or official of a Constitutional
Body on the ground of his or her failure to fulfil his or
her duties of office because of serious violation of this
Constitution and law, incompetence or misconduct or
failure to discharge the duties of office honestly or
serious violation of the code of conduct. If the motion is
passed by at least two thirds majority of the total number
of the then members of the House of Representatives, the
concerned person shall relieve of his or her office.
(3) There shall be an impeachment
recommendation committee in the House of
Representatives for the purpose of making
recommendation after inquiring into whether there exist
the ground and reason for moving a motion of
impeachment against any person under clause (2).
(4) The committee under clause (3) shall consist
of eleven members of the House of Representatives.
(5) If at least three members of the House of
Representatives certify and submit a petition that the
(70)

received information, notice or petition is admissible on
the ground of serious violation of the Constitution or
incompetence or misconduct or failure to discharge the
duties of office honestly or serious violation of the code
of conduct by the person relieving of office on
impeachment under clause (2), and the committee under
clause (3), upon inquiring into such petition in
accordance with Federal law, makes recommendation to
the House of Representatives for impeachment
proceedings, a motion of impeachment under clause (2)
may be moved.
(6) After the commencement of impeachment
proceedings under clause (2), the Chief Justice of Nepal
or Judge of the Supreme Court, member of the Judicial
Council, chief or official of the Constitutional Body shall
not be allowed to discharge the duties of his or her office
pending the settlement of such proceedings.
(7) A person who is charged with impeachment
under clause (1) or (2) shall be provided with a
reasonable opportunity to defend himself or herself.
(8) Nothing shall bar the taking of action under
the Federal law in relation to the offence, if any,
committed while in office by the President or VicePresident, Chief Justice of Nepal or a Judge of the
Supreme Court of Nepal, member of the Judicial
Council, chief or official of a Constitutional Body who is
relieved of office upon the passage of a motion of
impeachment under this Article.
(9) A person who is relieved of office on the
passage of a motion of impeachment under clause (1) or
(2) shall not be entitled to obtain any facility accruing
from such office and to be appointed or nominated to
any public office in the future.

(71)

(10) Other matters relating to impeachment shall
be as provided for in the Federal law.
102.

Penalty for unauthorized presence or voting: If a person
who has not taken oath under Article 88 or who is not a
member of the Federal Parliament is present or votes in
the capacity of member in a meeting of either House of
the Federal Parliament or of its committee, the person
shall, by order of the person chairing the meeting, be
fined with a sum of five thousand rupees for each
instance of such presence or voting, and such fine shall
be recovered as a government due.

103.

Privileges: (1) There shall be full freedom of speech in
both Houses of the Federal Parliament; and no member
shall be arrested, detained or prosecuted in any court for
anything expressed or any vote cast by him or her in the
House.
(2) Each House of the Federal Parliament shall,
subject to this Constitution, have full power to regulate
and decide its internal business, and the concerned
House shall have the exclusive right to decide whether or
not any of its proceedings is regular or irregular. No
question shall be raised in any court in this behalf.
(3) No comment shall be made about the good
faith concerning any proceeding of any House of the
Federal Parliament, and no publication and broadcasting
of any kind shall be made about anything said by any
member, intentionally distorting or misinterpreting the
meaning of the speech.
(4) The provisions of clauses (1) and (3) shall
also apply to other persons who are entitled to participate
in the meetings of the House than the members of the
Federal Parliament.

(72)

(5) No proceedings shall be initiated in any court
against any person in respect of the publication, under
the authority granted by any House of the Federal
Parliament, of any document, report, vote or proceeding.
Explanation: For the purposes of this clause and clauses
(1), (2), (3) and (4), "House" means the House of
Representatives or the National Assembly, and includes a
joint sitting or committee or joint committee of the
Federal Parliament.
(6) No member of the Federal Parliament shall be
arrested during the period from the issuance of a notice
summoning the session to its prorogation.
Provided that nothing in this clause shall be
deemed to bar the arresting under the Federal law of any
member on a criminal charge. If any member is so
arrested, the authority making such arrest shall forthwith
give information thereof to the person presiding over the
concerned House.
(7) Any breach of the privileges shall be deemed
to constitute contempt of the Federal Parliament, and the
concerned House shall have the exclusive right to decide
whether any privilege has been breached.
(8) If any person is in contempt of any House, the
person presiding over the concerned House may, after a
decision by the House to that effect, admonish, warn or
impose a sentence of imprisonment for a term not
exceeding three months or of a fine not exceeding ten
thousand rupees on such person, and such fine shall be
recovered as a government due.
Provided that if such person apologies to the
satisfaction of the concerned House, it may pardon, remit
or commute the sentence imposed on, him or her.

(73)

104.

(9) Other matters relating to the privileges of the
Federal Parliament shall be as provided for in the Federal
law.
Procedures relating to conduct of business: (1) Each
House of the Federal Parliament shall frame rules to
conduct its business, maintain order during its meetings
and regulate the constitution, functions and procedures
of the committees and procedures of the House or its
committee. Until such rules are framed, the Federal
Parliament shall regulate its procedures on its own.
(2) The conduct of business of the joint sitting of
the Federal Parliament, and constitution and proceedings
of the joint committee of the Federal Parliament shall be
regulated by the rules or procedures approved by the
joint sitting of both Houses of the Federal Parliament.

105.

Restriction on discussion: No discussion shall be held in
either House of the Federal Parliament on any matters
that may cause adverse effect on the dispensation of
justice on any cases which are sub judice in any courts of
Nepal and on any judicial acts done by Judges in the
course of performance of their duties.
Provided that nothing in this Article shall be
deemed to bar the expression of opinions about the
conduct of a Judge during deliberations held on a motion
of impeachment.

106.

Secretary General and Secretary of Federal Parliament:
(1) The President shall appoint the Secretary General of
the House of Representatives on recommendation of
both the Speaker of the House of Representatives and the
Chairperson of the National Assembly, the Secretary of
the House of Representatives on recommendation of the
Speaker, and the Secretary of the National Assembly on
recommendation of the Chairperson.

(74)

(2) The qualification, functions, duties, powers
and other conditions of service of the Secretary General
of the Federal Parliament, Secretary of the House of
Representatives and Secretary of the National Assembly
shall be as provided for in the Federal law.
107.

Secretariat of Federal Parliament: There shall be a
Secretariat for conducting and managing the business of
the Federal Parliament. The establishment of such
Secretariat and other matters related thereto shall be as
provided for in the Federal law.

108.

Remuneration: The remuneration and facilities of the
Speaker and the Deputy Speaker of the House of
Representatives, the Chairperson and the ViceChairperson of the National Assembly, chairpersons of
the committees and members of the Federal Parliament
shall be as provided for in the Federal law, and as
specified by the Government of Nepal until such law is
made.

(75)

Part-9
Federal Legislative Procedures
109.

Legislative powers of Federal Parliament: The legislative
powers of the Federal Parliament shall be as enumerated
in the lists of Schedule-5, Schedule-7 and Schedule-9.

110.

Procedures for introduction of Bills: (1) A Bill may,
subject to this Constitution, be introduced in any House
of the Federal Parliament.
Provided that a Money Bill shall be introduced
only in the House of Representatives.
(2) A Money Bill and a Bill concerning a security
body including the Nepal Army, Nepal Police and Armed
Police Force, Nepal shall be introduced only as a
Government Bill.
(3) "Money Bill" means a Bill concerning any or
all of the following subjects:
(a)

the imposition, collection, abolition,
remission, alteration or regulation of
taxes,

(b)

the preservation of the Federal
Consolidated Fund or any other Federal
Government Fund, the deposit of
moneys into and the appropriation or the
withdrawal of moneys from such Funds,
or the reduction, increment or
cancellation of appropriations or of
proposed expenditures from such Funds,

(c)

the regulation of matters relating to the
borrowing of money or the giving of
guarantee by the Government of Nepal,
or any matter pertaining to the
amendment of the law with respect to
(76)

any financial obligations undertaken or
to be undertaken by the Government of
Nepal,
(d)

the custody and investment of all
revenues received by any Federal
Government Fund, moneys acquired
through the repayment of loans, and
grant moneys, or accounts or audits of
the accounts of the Government of
Nepal, or

(e)

Other matters directly related to any of
the subjects specified in clause (a), (b),
(c) or (d).

Provided that any Bill shall not be
deemed to be a Money Bill by the reason only
that it provides for the levying of any charges and
fees such as license fee, application fee, renewal
fee or for the imposition of fines or penalty of
imprisonment.
(4) If any question arises whether a Bill is a
Money Bill or not, the decision of the Speaker thereon
shall be final.
111.

Procedures for passage of Bills: (1) A Bill passed by one
House of the Federal Parliament shall be transmitted to
the other House as soon as possible and such Bill, if
passed by the receiving House, shall be presented to the
President for assent.
(2) A Money Bill passed by the House of
Representatives shall be transmitted to the National
Assembly. The National Assembly shall, after
deliberations on such Bill, send back the Bill to the
House of Representatives within fifteen days from the
date of receipt of the Bill, with suggestions, if any.
(77)

(3) The House of Representatives shall, upon
deliberations on a Bill returned with suggestions under
clause (2), present the Bill incorporating such
suggestions as it may deem appropriate to the President
for assent.
(4) If the National Assembly does not return a
Money Bill received under clause (2) for more than
fifteen days, the House of Representatives may present
the Bill to the President for assent.
(5) Any Bill, except for a Money Bill, passed by
the House of Representatives and transmitted to the
National Assembly shall be returned with approval or
suggestions within two months from the date of receipt.
If the National Assembly does not return the Bill within
that period, the House of Representatives may, by a
resolution passed by a majority of the total number of its
existing members, present the Bill to the President for
assent.
(6) If any Bill, other than a Money Bill, passed
by one House is rejected or is passed with amendments
by the other House, the Bill shall be returned to the
House where it originated.
(7) If the House of Representatives, in
considering a Bill which has been rejected or amended
and returned by the National Assembly under clause (6),
passes it again as it was or with amendments, by a
majority of the total number of its existing members, the
Bill shall be presented to the President for assent.
(8) If a Bill which has been returned with
amendments by the House of Representatives to the
National Assembly under clause (6) is also again passed,
with such amendments, by a majority of the number of
existing members of the National Assembly, the Bill
shall be presented to the President for assent.
(78)

(9) The following Bills shall be referred to a joint
sitting of the both Houses, and if the joint sitting passes
the Bill as it was or with amendments, the House in
which the Bill originated shall present it to the President
for assent:
(a)

Bills which, though passed by the
National Assembly, have been rejected
by the House of Representatives, or

(b)

Bills which have been returned to the
National Assembly with amendments by
the House of Representatives, but the
National Assembly has not agreed on
such amendments.

(10) Even though the session of a House is
prorogued while a Bill is under its consideration,
deliberations on the Bill may continue at the succeeding
session.
Provided that if the House of Representatives is
dissolved or its term expires when any Bill introduced in
the House of Representatives is under its consideration
or when any Bill passed by the House of Representatives
is under consideration in the National Assembly, such
Bill shall lapse.
112.

Withdrawal of Bills: One who has introduced a Bill may,
with the approval of the House, withdraw the Bill.

113.

Assent on Bills: (1) A Bill which is to be submitted to
the President for assent under Article 111 shall be so
submitted by the Speaker or the Chairperson of the
House in which the Bill originated after it has been
certified by him or her.
Provided that in the case of a Money Bill, the
Speaker shall so certify.

(79)

(2) A Bill submitted to the President for his or her
assent in accordance with this Article shall be assented to
within fifteen days, both Houses shall be informed
thereof as soon as possible.
(3) If the President is of the opinion that any Bill,
except a Money Bill, submitted for assent needs
reconsideration, he or she may, within fifty days from the
date of presentation of such Bill, return the Bill with his
or her message to the House in which the Bill originated.
(4) If any Bill is returned with a message by the
President, and both Houses reconsider, passes such Bill
as it was or with amendments and submit it again, the
President shall give assent to that Bill within fifteen days
of such submission.
(5) A Bill shall become an Act after the President
gives assent to it.
114.

Provisions relating to Ordinance: (1) If, at any time,
except when both Houses of the Federal Parliament are
in session, circumstances exist which render it necessary
to take immediate action, the President may, on
recommendation of the Council of Ministers, promulgate
an Ordinance.
(2) An Ordinance promulgated under clause (1)
shall have the same force and effect as an Act.
Provided that every such Ordinance:
(a)

shall be tabled at the session of both
Houses of the Federal Parliament held
after the promulgation, and if not
passed by both Houses, it shall ipso
facto cease to be effective,

(b)

may be repealed at any time by the
President, and
(80)

(c)

shall, unless rendered ineffective or
repealed under sub-clause (a) or (b),
ipso facto cease to be effective at the
expiration of sixty days after the day on
which a meeting of both Houses is
held.

Explanation: For the purposes of this clause, "day
on which a meeting of both Houses is held"
means the day on which a session or meeting of
both Houses of the Federal Parliament
commences or is held, and this term means the
later day on which a meeting of the House is held
if the Houses of the Federal Parliament meet on
different dates.

(81)

Part-10
Federal Financial Procedures
115.

No tax to be levied or loan to be raised: (1) No tax shall
be levied and collected except in accordance with law.
(2) No loan shall be raised and guarantee given
by the Government of Nepal except as provided for in
the Federal law.

116.

Federal Consolidated Fund: Except for the revenues of
trusts (Guthi), all revenues received by the Government
of Nepal, all loans raised on the security of revenues, all
amounts received in repayment of any loans made under
the authority of any Act and any other moneys received
by the Government of Nepal shall, except as otherwise
provided by a Federal Act, be credited to a Government
Fund to be known as the Federal Consolidated Fund.

117.

Expenditures from Federal Consolidated Fund or Federal
Government Fund: No expenditure shall be incurred out
of the Federal Consolidated Fund or any other Federal
Government Fund except the following:
(a)

moneys charged
Consolidated Fund,

(b)

moneys required to meet the expenditure
under a Federal Appropriation Act,

(c)

advance moneys authorized by a Federal
Act required to meet expenditures, when
an
Appropriation
Bill
is
under
consideration, or

(d)

expenditures
to
be
incurred
in
extraordinary circumstances under a
Federal Vote of Credit Act which contains
only a description of expenditures.

(82)

on

the

Federal

Provided that matters relating to the
Federal Contingency Fund shall be
governed by Article 124.
118.

Expenditures chargeable on Federal Consolidated Fund:
The expenditures relating to the following matters shall
be charged on the Federal Consolidated Fund, and
approval of the Federal Parliament shall not be required
for such expenditures:
(a)

the amount required as remuneration and
facilities of the President and the Vicepresident,

(b)

the amount required as remuneration and
facilities payable to the Chief Justice of
Nepal, Judges of the Supreme Court, and
members of the Judicial Council,

(c)

the amount required as remuneration and
facilities payable to the Speaker and the
Deputy Speaker of the House of
Representatives, and the Chairperson and
the Vice Chairperson of the National
Assembly,

(d)

the amount required as remuneration and
facilities payable to the chiefs and officials
of the Constitutional Bodies,

(e)

the amount required as remuneration and
facilities of the Chiefs of States,

(f)

the administrative expenses of the Office of
the President or the Vice President, the
Supreme Court, the Judicial Council, the
Constitutional Bodies, and the offices of
Chiefs of States,

(83)

119.

(g)

all charges relating to debts for which the
Government of Nepal is liable,

(h)

any sum required to satisfy any judgment or
decree made by a court against the
Government of Nepal, and

(i)

any other sum to be chargeable by the
Federal law on the Federal Consolidated
Fund.

Estimates of revenues and expenditures: (1) The Minister
for Finance of the Government of Nepal shall, in respect
of every financial year, lay before the joint sitting of both
Houses of the Federal Parliament an annual estimate
setting out, inter alia, the following matters:
(a)

an estimate of revenues,

(b)

the moneys required to meet the charges
on the Federal Consolidated Fund, and

(c)

the moneys required to meet the
expenditure to be provided for by a
Federal Appropriation Act.

(2) The annual estimate to be laid pursuant to
clause (1) shall also be accompanied by a statement of
the expenses allocated to every Ministry in the previous
financial year and particulars of whether the objectives
of the expenses have been achieved.
(3) The Minister for Finance of the Government
of Nepal shall lay before the Federal Parliament an
estimate of revenues and expenditures under clause (1)
on the 15th day of Jesta (mid May) each year.
120.

Appropriation Act: The moneys to be spent under an
Appropriation Act shall be specified under concerned
heads in an Appropriation Bill.

(84)

121.

Supplementary estimates: (1) The Minister for Finance
of the Government of Nepal may lay before the House of
Representatives a supplementary estimate if it is found in
any financial year,(a)

that the sum authorized to be spent for a
particular service by the Appropriation
Act for the current financial year is
insufficient, or that a need has arisen for
expenditures on some new service not
provided for by the Appropriation Act
for that year, or

(b)

that the expenditures made during that
financial year are in excess of the
amount authorized by the Appropriation
Act.

(2) The sums included in the supplementary
estimate shall be specified under the related heads in a
Supplementary Appropriation Bill.
122.

Votes on account: (1) Notwithstanding anything
contained elsewhere in this Part, a portion of the
expenditure estimated for the financial year may, when
an Appropriation Bill is under consideration, be incurred
in advance, as provided for in the Federal Act.
(2) A Vote on Account Bill shall not be
introduced until the estimates of revenues and
expenditures have been laid in accordance with Article
119, and the sums involved in the Vote on Account shall
not exceed one-third of the estimate of expenditures for
the financial year.
(3) The expenditures incurred in accordance with
the Federal Vote on Account Act shall be included in the
Appropriation Bill.

(85)

123.

Votes of credit: Notwithstanding anything contained
elsewhere in this Part, if owing to an emergency due to
either natural causes or a threat of external aggression or
internal disturbances or other reasons, it appears to be
impractical or inexpedient in view of the security or
interest of the country to specify the details required
under Article 119, the Minister for Finance of the
Government of Nepal may lay before the House of
Representatives a Vote of Credit Bill giving only a
statement of expenditures.

124.

Federal contingency fund: (1) A Federal Act may create a
fund to be known as the contingency fund into which
such moneys as may be determined by the Federal Act
shall be paid from time to time.
(2) The Government of Nepal shall control the
fund under clause (1), and may meet any unforeseen
expenditure out of such fund.
(3) The amount of the expenditure under clause
(2) shall be reimbursed as soon as possible as provided
for in the Federal Act.

125.

Act relating to financial procedures: Matters relating to
the transfer of moneys appropriated by the Federal Act
from one head to another and other financial procedures
shall be as provided for in the Federal Act.

(86)

Part-11
Judiciary
126.

Courts to exercise powers relating to justice: (1) Powers
relating to justice in Nepal shall be exercised by courts
and other judicial bodies in accordance with this
Constitution, other laws and the recognized principles of
justice.
(2)
All shall abide by the orders or decisions
made in the course of trial of lawsuits by the courts.

127.

Courts: (1) There shall be the following courts in Nepal:
(a)

Supreme Court,

(b)

High Court, and

(c)

District Court.

(2) In addition to the courts under clause (1),
judicial bodies may be formed at the Local level to try
cases under law or other bodies as required may be
formed to pursue alternative dispute settlement methods.
128.

Supreme Court: (1) There shall be a Supreme Court in
Nepal.
(2) The Supreme Court shall be a court of record.
All courts and judicial bodies shall, except as otherwise
provided in this Constitution, be under the Supreme
Court. The Supreme Court shall have the final authority
to interpret this Constitution and laws.
(3) The Supreme Court may inspect, supervise
and give necessary directives to, it and courts,
specialized courts or other judicial bodies under its
jurisdiction, in relation to matters relating to judicial
administration or management.
(4) All must abide by any interpretation of the
Constitution or a law made by or any legal principle laid
(87)

down by the Supreme Court in the course of trying a
lawsuit. If anyone makes obstruction in the dispensation
of justice by, or disregard any order or judgment handed
down by, it or any of its subordinate courts, the Supreme
Court may, in accordance with law, initiate proceedings
and impose punishment for contempt.
129.

Appointment and qualification of Chief Justice of Nepal
and Judges of Supreme Court: (1) The Supreme Court
shall consist of a maximum of twenty Judges, in addition
to the Chief Justice of Nepal.
(2) The President shall appoint the Chief Justice,
on recommendation of the Constitutional Council, and
other Judges of the Supreme Court, on recommendation
of the Judicial Council.
(3) Any person who has served as a Judge of the
Supreme Court for at least three years shall be qualified
for appointment as the Chief Justice.
(4) The term of office of the Chief Justice shall
be six years.
(5) Any citizen of Nepal who has obtained a
bachelor's degree in law and served as the Chief Judge or
a Judge of a High Court for at least five years or who has
obtained a bachelor's degree in law and constantly
practiced law as a senior advocate or advocate for at
least fifteen years or who is a distinguished jurist having
constantly worked for at least fifteen years in the judicial
or legal field or who has served in the post of Gazetted
first class or a higher post of the Judicial Service for at
least twelve years shall be deemed qualified for
appointment as a Judge of the Supreme Court.
Explanation: The period during which one has served as
the Chief Judge or Judge of an Appellate Court prior to
the commencement of this Constitution shall, for the
(88)

purposes of this clause, be deemed to be the period of
service in the capacity of the Chief Judge or Judge of the
High Court.
(6) If the office of the Chief Justice falls vacant
or the Chief Justice is unable to carry out the duties of
his or her office by reason of illness or otherwise or he or
she cannot be present in the Supreme Court by reason of
a leave of absence or his or her being outside of Nepal,
the senior-most Judge of the Supreme Court shall act as
the Acting Chief Justice.
130.

Conditions of service and facilities of Chief Justice and
Judges: (1) If the Chief Justice or a Judge of the Supreme
Court who has served for at least five years resigns or
undergoes compulsory retirement or dies, he or she shall
be entitled to such pension as may be provided for in the
Federal law.
(2) Except as otherwise provided in this
Constitution, the remuneration and other conditions of
service of the Chief Justice and Judges of the Supreme
Court shall be provided for in the Federal law.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in
clauses (1) and (2), the Chief Justice or a Judge of the
Supreme Court who has been removed from office by
way of impeachment or who has been punished by a
court for a criminal offence involving moral turpitude
shall not be entitled to gratuity or pension.
(4) The remuneration and other conditions of
service of the Chief Justice or a Judge of the Supreme
Court shall not be altered to his or her disadvantage.
Provided that this provision shall not apply in
cases where a state of emergency is declared because of
extreme economic disarrays.

(89)

131.

132.

Vacation of office of Chief Justice or Judge of Supreme
Court: The office of the Chief Justice or a Judge of the
Supreme Court shall be vacant in any of the following
circumstances:
(a)

if he or she tenders resignation in writing to
the President,

(b)

if he or she attains the age of sixty-five years,

(c)

if a motion of impeachment is passed
against him or her under Article 101,

(d)

if the Chief Justice is removed from his or
her office by the President, on
recommendation of the Constitutional
Council, and the Judge of the Supreme
Court is removed from his or her office by
the President, on recommendation of the
Judicial Council, on the ground that he or
she is unable to discharge his or her duties
because of physical or mental illness,

(e)

if he or she is punished by a court for a
criminal offence involving moral turpitude,

(f)

if he or she dies.

Chief Justice and Judges of Supreme Court not to be
engaged in any other office: (1) No Chief Justice or
Judge of the Supreme Court shall be engaged in or
deputed to any office other than that of Judge.
Provided that the Government of Nepal may, in
consultation with the Judicial Council, depute a Judge of
the Supreme Court to work concerning judicial inquiry,
or to legal or judicial investigation or research for a
specified period.
(2) No person who has once held the office of
Chief Justice or a Judge of the Supreme Court shall be
(90)

eligible for appointment to any government office,
except as otherwise provided in this Constitution.
133.

Jurisdiction of Supreme Court: (1) Any citizen of Nepal
may file a petition in the Supreme Court to have any law
or any part thereof declared void on the ground of
inconsistency with this Constitution because it imposes
an unreasonable restriction on the enjoyment of any
fundamental right conferred by this Constitution or on
any other ground, or to have any law or any part thereof
made by a State Assembly declared void because it is
inconsistent with any law made by the Federal
Parliament or to have any law or any part thereof made
by a Municipal Assembly or Village Assembly declared
void because it is inconsistent with a law made by the
Federal Parliament or the State Assembly, and the
Supreme Court shall have an extra-ordinary power to
declare that law to be void either ab initio or from the
date of its decision if the law appears to be so
inconsistent.
(2) The Supreme Court shall, for the enforcement
of the fundamental rights conferred by this Constitution
or of any other legal right for which no other remedy has
been provided or for which the remedy even though
provided appears to be inadequate or ineffective or for
the settlement of any constitutional or legal question
involved in any dispute of public interest or concern,
have the extraordinary power to issue necessary and
appropriate orders, provide appropriate remedies,
enforce such right or settle such dispute.
(3) Under the extra-ordinary jurisdiction under
clause (2), the Supreme Court may issue appropriate
orders and writs including the writs of habeas corpus,
mandamus, certiorari, prohibition and quo warranto.

(91)

Provided that except on the ground of lack of
jurisdiction, the Supreme Court shall not under this
clause interfere with any internal proceedings of the
Federal Parliament or State Assembly, and with any
proceedings instituted by the Federal Parliament or State
Assembly concerning violation of its privileges and
penalties imposed therefor.
(4) Subject to this Constitution, the Supreme
Court shall, as provided for in the Federal law, have the
power to originally try and settle cases, hear appeals, test
judgments referred for confirmation, revise cases, hear
petitions or review its judgments or final orders. Judges
other than those having handed down the previous
judgment shall make such review.
(5) The Supreme Court shall settle appeals from
cases originally tried and settled by a High Court and
matters of public importance involving questions of
interpretation of the Constitution and law or cases
recommended by a High Court, accompanied by its
opinion, that it is reasonable that decision be made by the
Supreme Court.
(6) Other powers and procedures of the Supreme
Court shall be as provided for in the Federal law.
134.

Power to transfer cases: (1) If cases which involve
substantially the same questions are sub judice before the
Supreme Court and a High Court, and the Supreme
Court is satisfied on its own or on application by the
Attorney General or parties to such cases that such
questions are of public importance, the Supreme Court
shall have the power to procure and adjudge the cases
together.
(2) If there exists a special situation where
judicial impartiality can be questioned if a case filed in a
High Court is tried by that Court, the Supreme Court
(92)

may, for reasons and grounds to be recorded, order such
case to be transferred from such High Court to another
High Court and tried by the latter High Court, in
accordance with law.
135.

Not to be engaged in practice of law: No Chief Justice or
Judge of the Supreme Court shall, after retirement from
office, be engaged in the practice of law, mediation or
arbitration proceedings before any office or court.

136.

Responsibility of Chief Justice: The Chief Justice shall
have the ultimate responsibility to make effective the
administration of justice by the Supreme Court,
subordinate courts, specialized courts or other judicial
bodies.

137.

Formation of Constitutional Bench: (1) There shall be a
Constitutional Bench in the Supreme Court. The
Constitutional Bench shall consist of the Chief Justice
and other four Judges designated by the Chief Justice on
recommendation of the Judicial Council.
(2) The Bench under clause (1) shall originally try
and settle the following cases, in addition to the petitions
filed in accordance with clause (1) of Article 133:
(a)

disputes relating to jurisdiction between
the Federation and a State, between
States, between a State and a Local level
and between Local levels,

(b)

disputes relating to election to members
of the Federal Parliament or State
Assembly and matters relating to
disqualification of a member of the
Federal Parliament or of the State
Assembly.

(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in Article
133, if it appears that any case sub judice in the Supreme
(93)

Court involves a question of serious constitutional
interpretation, the Chief Justice may appoint such case to
be tried by the Bench under clause (1).
(4) Other provisions relating to the functioning of
the Constitutional Bench shall be as determined by the
Supreme Court.
138.

Annual report: (1) The Supreme Court, Judicial Council
and Judicial Service Commission shall, every year,
submit annual reports to the President, and the President
shall submit such reports to the Federal Parliament
through the Prime Minister.
(2) If the Federal Parliament, upon deliberating
on the annual reports submitted under clause (1), deems
it necessary to give any suggestion, it may give such
suggestion to the concerned body through the
Government of Nepal, Ministry of Law and Justice.
(3) Other provisions relating to annual reports
under clause (1) shall be as provided for in the Federal
law.

139.

High Courts: (1) There shall be a High Court in each
State.
(2) If anyone makes obstruction in the
dispensation of justice by, or disregard any order or
judgment handed down by, it or any of its subordinate
courts or judicial bodies, the High Court may initiate
proceedings on and impose punishment for contempt, as
provided for in the Federal law.
(3) Each High Court shall consist of such number
of Judges, in addition to the Chief Judge, as provided for
in the Federal law.

140.

Appointment and qualification of Chief Judge and
Judges of High Court: (1) The Chief Justice shall, on
(94)

recommendation of the Judicial Council, appoint the
Chief Judge and Judges of the High Court.
(2) Any citizen of Nepal who has obtained a
bachelor's degree in law and served as a Judge of a
District Court for at least five years or who has obtained
a bachelor's degree in law and constantly practiced law
as a senior advocate or advocate for at least ten years or
who has constantly been engaged in the teaching or
research of law or in any other field relation to law or
justice for at least ten years or who has served in the post
of at least Gazetted first class of the Judicial Service for
at least five years shall be deemed qualified for
appointment as the Chief Judge or a Judge of the High
Court.
(3) Appointments to the Chief Judge and Judges
of a High Court shall be made from amongst the persons
who have possessed the qualification under clause (2) on
the basis of the proportion of cases settled by him or her
annually and of evaluation of cases upheld, quashed or
reversed by superior courts in the course of final decision
thereof, in the case of a District Judge, and of his or her
seniority, qualification and evaluation of standard of
performance of business, in the case of a person who has
served in the post of at least Gazetted first class of the
Judicial Service, and of evaluation of seniority,
professional continuity, honesty, professional conduct
and contribution made to the field of law and justice, in
the case of others.
(4) If the office of the Chief Judge falls vacant or
the Chief Judge is otherwise unable to carry out the
duties of his or her office or cannot be present in the
High Court by reason of a leave of absence or his or her
being outside of the State, the senior-most Judge of the
High Court shall act as the Acting Chief Judge.
(95)

141.

Conditions of service and facilities of Chief Judge and
Judges: (1) Except as otherwise provided in this
Constitution, the remuneration and other conditions of
service of the Chief Judge and Judges of the High Court
shall be provided for in the Federal law.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in clause
(1), the Chief Judge or a Judge of a High Court who has
been removed from office upon action by the Judicial
Council or upon punishment by a court for a criminal
offence involving moral turpitude shall not be entitled to
gratuity or pension.
Provided that this provision shall not apply in
cases where the Judicial Council has removed him or her
from office on the ground of inability to perform the
duties of his or her office because of physical or mental
illness.
(3) The remuneration and other conditions of
service of the Chief Judge or a Judge of the High Court
shall not be altered to his or her disadvantage.
Provided that this provision shall not apply in
cases where a state of emergency is declared because of
extreme economic disarrays.

142.

Vacation of office of Chief Judge or Judge: (1) The
office of Chief Judge or Judge of a High Court shall be
vacant in any of the following circumstances:
(a)

if he or she tenders resignation in writing
before the Chief Justice,

(b)

if he or she attains the age of sixty-three
years,

(c)

if he or she is removed from office by
the Chief Justice on recommendation of
the Judicial Council, on the ground of
(96)

his or her incompetence, bad conduct,
failure to perform his or her duties
honestly, performance of business with
mala fide intention or serious violation
by him or her of the code of conduct
required to be observed by him or her,
(d)

if he or she is removed from office by
the Chief Justice on recommendation of
the Judicial Council on the ground that
he or she is unable to discharge his or
her duties because of physical or mental
illness,

(e)

if he or she is punished by a court for a
criminal offence involving moral turpitude,

(f)

if he or she dies.

(2) A Judge who is facing a charge shall be
provided with a reasonable opportunity to defend himself
or herself prior to removing him or her from the office
under sub-clause (c) of clause (1). The Judge against
whom the proceedings have been so instituted shall not
be allowed to perform the duties of his or her office until
the proceedings are completed.
(3) Nothing shall bar the institution of action in
accordance with the Federal law against the Chief Judge
or Judge who has been removed from office for an
offence which he or she has committed while in office.
143.

Chief Judge and Judges not to be engaged in any other
office and provisions relating to transfer : (1) No Chief
Judge or Judge of a High Court shall be engaged in or
deputed to any office other than that of Judge.
Provided that the Government of Nepal may, in
consultation with the Judicial Council, depute a Judge of
the High Court to work concerning judicial inquiry, or to
(97)

legal or judicial investigation or research or to any
business of national concern for any specific period.
(2) The Chief Justice may, on recommendation of
the Judicial Council, transfer a Judge of a High Court to
another High Court.
144.

Jurisdiction of High Court: (1) The High Court shall
have the power to issue necessary and appropriate
orders, for the enforcement of the fundamental rights
conferred by this Constitution or for the enforcement of
any other legal right for which no other remedy has been
provided or for which the remedy even though provided
appears to be inadequate or ineffective or for the
settlement of any legal question involved in any dispute
of public interest or concern,
(2) For the purposes of clause (1), the High Court
may issue appropriate orders and writs including the
writs of habeas corpus, mandamus, certiorari,
prohibition and quo warranto.
Provided that except on the ground of absence of
jurisdiction, the High Court shall not under this clause
interfere with any internal proceedings of the Federal
Parliament or State Assembly, and with any proceedings
instituted by the Federal Parliament or State Assembly
concerning violation of its privileges and penalties
imposed therefor.
(3) The High Court shall, in accordance with the
Federal law, have the power to originally try and settle
cases, hear appeals and test judgments referred for
confirmation.
(4) Other powers and procedures of the High
Court shall be as provided for in the Federal law.

145.

Power to transfer cases: (1) If a High Court is of the
opinion that a case which is sub judice in a subordinate
(98)

court within its jurisdiction involves a question relating
to a State law and it is essential to settle that question in
order to decide the case, the High Court may procure the
case and dispose the case wholly or decide only such
question and remand the case to the court of first
instance.
(2) If it is satisfied with the reason that there
exists a situation where judicial impartiality can be
questioned if a case filed in a District Court is tried by
that Court, the High Court may, for reasons and grounds
to be recorded, order such case to be transferred from
such District Court to another District Court under its
jurisdiction and tried by the latter District Court, as
provided for in the Federal law.
146.

To be engaged in practice of law: A person who has
retired from the office of a Judge of a High Court may be
engaged in the practice of law before the Supreme Court
and a High Court, other than the High Court where he or
she has served as a Judge and a subordinate court.

147.

Responsibility of Chief Judge: The Chief Judge shall
have the ultimate responsibility to make effective the
administration of justice by the High Court and the
Courts or other judicial bodies which are subordinate to
it. For that purpose, the Chief Judge may, subject to this
Constitution and the Federal law, give necessary
direction to the subordinate Courts and judicial bodies.

148.

District Courts: (1) There shall be a District Court in
each District.
(2) The Local level judicial bodies established in
accordance with the State law shall be subordinate to the
District Court. The District Court may inspect as well as
supervise and give necessary direction to its subordinate
judicial bodies.

(99)

149.

Appointment, qualification, remuneration and other
conditions of service of Judges of District Courts: (1)
The Chief Justice shall, on recommendation of the
Judicial Council, appoint Judges of the District Courts.
(2) The vacant posts of Judges of the District
Court shall be filled as follows:
(a)

twenty percent of the vacant posts, on
the basis of evaluation of seniority,
qualification and competency, from
amongst the officers who have obtained
bachelor's degree in law and served for
at least three years in the post of
Gazetted Second Class of the Judicial
Service,

(b)

forty percent of the vacant posts, on the
basis of open competitive examination,
from amongst the officers who have
obtained bachelor's degree in law and
served for at least three years in the post
of Gazetted Second Class of the Judicial
Service,

(c)

the remaining forty percent of the vacant
posts, on the basis of open competitive
examination, from amongst the citizens
of Nepal who, having obtained
bachelor's degree in law, have constantly
practiced law for at least eight years as
an advocate or who, having obtained
bachelor's degree in law, have served in
a Gazetted post of the Judicial Service
for at least eight years or have constantly
been engaged in the teaching or research
of law or served in any other field of law
or justice for at least eight years.
(100)

(3) The Judicial Service Commission shall, in
accordance with the Federal law, hold written and oral
competitive examinations for the persons who have
possessed the qualification under sub-clauses (b) and (c)
of clause (2), and make recommendation, in order of
merit, to the Judicial Council for appointment as District
Judges.
(4) The remuneration and other conditions of
service of the Judges of the District Court shall be as
provided for in the Federal law.
(5) The remuneration and other conditions of
service of a Judge of the District Court shall not be
altered to his or her disadvantage.
Provided that this provision shall not apply in
cases where a state of emergency is declared because of
extreme economic disarrays.
(6) The office of a Judge of the District Court
shall be vacant in any of the following circumstances:
(a)

if he or she tenders resignation in writing
before the Chief Justice,

(b)

if he or she attains the age of sixty-three
years,

(c)

if he or she is removed from office by
the Chief Justice on recommendation of
the Judicial Council, on the ground of
his or her incompetence, misconduct,
failure to perform his or her duties
honestly, performance of business with
mala fide intention or serious violation
by him or her of the code of conduct
required to be observed by him or her,

(101)

(d)

if he or she is removed from office by
the Chief Justice on recommendation of
the Judicial Council on the ground that
he or she is unable to continue service
and discharge his or her duties because
of physical or mental illness,

(e)

if he or she is punished by a court for a
criminal offence involving moral
turpitude,

(f)

if he or she dies.

(7) A District Judge who is accused shall be
given a reasonable opportunity to defend himself or
herself before removing him or her from office under
sub-clause (c) of clause (6). The District Judge against
whom the proceedings are so initiated shall not perform
the duties of his or her office until the proceedings are
completed.
(8) Nothing shall prevent the instituting of action,
in accordance with the Federal law, against a District
Judge who is removed from office for an offence which
he or she has committed while in office.
150.

District Judges not to be engaged in any other office and
provisions relating to transfer : (1) No District Judge
shall be engaged in or deputed to any office other than
that of Judge.
Provided that the Government of Nepal may, in
consultation with the Judicial Council, depute a District
Judge to work concerning judicial inquiry, or to legal or
judicial investigation or research and to any election
related work, for a specified period.
(2) The Chief Justice may, on recommendation of
the Judicial Council, transfer a District Judge from one
District Court to another District Court.
(102)

151.

Jurisdiction of District Court: (1) Except as otherwise
provided by the Federal law, a District Court shall have
the power to originally try and settle all cases under its
jurisdiction, to try petitions under law, including
petitions of habeas corpus and prohibition, hear appeals
under law from decisions made by quasi-judicial bodies,
hear appeals from decisions made by Local level judicial
bodies formed under the State law, institute contempt
proceedings and punish for contempt under the Federal
law if anyone makes obstruction in the dispensation of
justice by, or disregards any order or judgment by, it or
any of its subordinate courts.
(2) Other provisions relating to the jurisdiction
and procedures of the District Courts shall be as
provided for in the Federal law.

152.

Specialized courts: (1) Other specialized courts, judicial
bodies or tribunals may be formed to try and settle
specific types and nature of cases other than those
mentioned in Article 127, as provided for in the Federal
law.
Provided that no specialized court, judicial body
or tribunal shall be formed for any specific case.
(2) No criminal offence involving imprisonment
for a term of more than one year shall fall under the
jurisdiction of a body other than a court, specialized
court, military court or judicial body.

153.

Judicial Council: (1) There shall be a Judicial Council
to make recommendation or give advice, in accordance
with this Constitution, on the appointment of, transfer of,
disciplinary action against, and dismissal of, Judges, and
other matters relating to the administration of justice,
which shall consist of the following as its chairperson
and members:

(103)

(a)

The Chief Justice

(b)

The Federal Minister for
Law and Justice

- Member

(c) The senior-most Judge of
the Supreme Court

- Member

(d)

(e)

- Chairperson

One jurist nominated by
the
President
on
recommendation of the
Prime Minister

- Member

A senior advocate or
advocate who has gained
at least twenty years of
experience,
to
be
appointed
by
the
President
on
recommendation of the
Nepal Bar Association

- Member

(2) The term of office of the members under subclauses (d) and (e) of clause (1) shall be four years, and
their remuneration and facilities shall be equivalent to
those of a Judge of the Supreme Court.
(3) The members under sub-clauses (d) and (e) of
clause (1) shall be removed from office in the same
manner and on the same grounds as a Judge of the
Supreme Court.
(4) The chairperson and a member of the Judicial
Council may study the case associated with a complaint
filed in respect of any Judge, and make a report thereof
to the Judicial Council.

(104)

(5) If a preliminary inquiry of a complaint filed in
respect of any Judge reveals a need to have a detailed
inquiry by an expert, the Judicial Council may form an
inquiry committee.
(6) If a Judge, other than a Judge who can be
removed from office by way of impeachment in
accordance with this Constitution, commits an abuse of
authority by way of corruption, the Judicial Council may
investigate into the matter and institute a case in
accordance with law.
(7) The Judicial Council must prepare updated
records of the persons who are qualified for appointment
to offices of the Chief Justice, Judges of the Supreme
Court, Chief Judges and Judges of the High Courts.
(8) Other functions, duties and powers of the
Judicial Council shall be as provided for in the Federal
law.
154.

Judicial Service Commission: (1) In appointing,
transferring or promoting gazetted officers of the Federal
Judicial Service or taking departmental action
concerning such officers in accordance with law, the
Government of Nepal shall act on recommendation of
the Judicial Service Commission.
Provided that in making new permanent
appointments to gazetted posts of the Federal Judicial
Service from persons who are not already in the Federal
Government Service or making promotions from nongazetted posts of the Federal Judicial Service to gazetted
ones of that Service, the Government of Nepal shall act
on the recommendation of the Public Service
Commission.
Explanation: For the purposes of this Article,
the Public Service Commission shall hold open and
(105)

internal competitive examinations to be held for
appointments to Gazetted posts of the Federal Judicial
Service.
(2) The Judicial Service Commission shall
consist of the following as its chairperson and members:
(a) The Chief Justice

- Chairperson

(b) The Federal Minister for
Law and Justice

- Member

(c) The seniormost Judge of
the Supreme Court

- Member

(d) The Chairperson of the
Public
Service
Commission

- Member

(e) The Attorney General

- Member

(3) Other functions, duties, powers and
procedures of the Judicial Service Commission shall be
as provided for in the Federal law.
155.

Provisions relating to conditions of service and facilities:
Provisions relating to the remuneration, facilities and
conditions of service of the employees of the Federal
Judicial Service shall be as provided for in the Federal
Act.

156.

Provisions relating to State Judicial Service
Commission: Provisions relating to the formation of a
State Judicial Service Commission and the remuneration,
facilities and conditions of service of the employees of a
State Judicial Service shall be as provided for in the
Federal law.

(106)

Part-12
Attorney General
157.

Attorney General:
General of Nepal.

(1) There shall be an Attorney

(2) The President shall, on recommendation of
the Prime Minister, appoint the Attorney General. The
Attorney General shall hold office during the pleasure of
the Prime Minister.
(3) A person who is qualified to be appointed as a
Judge of the Supreme Court shall be eligible to be
appointed as the Attorney General.
(4) The office of the Attorney General shall be
vacant in any of the following circumstances:
(a)

if he or she tenders resignation in writing
to the President through the Prime
Minister,

(b)

if he or she is removed from office by
the President on recommendation of the
Prime Minister,

(c)

if he or she dies.

(5) The remuneration and other facilities of the
Attorney General shall be similar to those of a Judge of
the Supreme Court. Other conditions of service of the
Attorney General shall be in accordance with law.
158.

Functions, duties and powers of Attorney General: (1)
The Attorney General shall be the chief legal advisor to
the Government of Nepal. It shall be the duty of the
Attorney General to give opinions and advices on
constitutional and legal matters to the Government of
Nepal and such other authorities as the Government of
Nepal may specify.
(107)

(2) The Attorney General or government
attorneys subordinate to him or her shall represent the
Government of Nepal in lawsuits wherein the rights,
interests or concerns of the Government of Nepal are
involved. Except as provided otherwise in this
Constitution, the Attorney General shall have the right to
make a final decision as to whether to institute any case
on behalf of the Government of Nepal in any court,
judicial body or authority.
(3) Opinion of the Attorney General must be
obtained for withdrawing a case filed on behalf of the
Government of Nepal.
(4) The Attorney General may, upon invitation
by the Federal Parliament or any of its committees, to
appear and express his or her opinion on any legal
question in such a meeting.
(5) In the course of discharging the duties of his
or her office, the Attorney General shall have the right to
appear in any Court, office and authority of Nepal.
(6) The Attorney General shall, in the course of
performing his or her duties, have the power to carry out
the following acts, in addition to that set forth in clause
(2):
(a)

to defend, on behalf of the Government
of Nepal, any lawsuit in which the
Government of Nepal is a plaintiff or a
defendant,

(b)

to monitor, or cause to be monitored,
whether any interpretation given to a law
or any legal principle laid down by the
Supreme Court in the course of hearing
of lawsuits has been implemented,

(108)

(c)

if a complaint is made alleging that any
person held in custody has not been
treated humanely subject to this
Constitution or such person has not been
allowed to meet his or her relative or
through his or her legal practitioner or if
information of such matter is received, to
inquire thereinto and give necessary
directive to the concerned authority to
prevent such act.

(7) The Attorney General may so delegate his or
her functions, duties and powers under this Article to his
or her subordinate government attorneys as to be
exercised and complied with subject to the specified
conditions.
(8) In addition to the functions, duties and powers
mentioned in this Article, other functions, duties and
powers of the Attorney General shall be pursuant to this
Constitution and the Federal law.
159.

Annual report: (1) The Attorney General shall, every
year, submit to the President an annual report on the
works which he or she has performed pursuant to this
Constitution and the Federal law, and the President shall
cause such report to be laid before the Federal
Parliament through the Prime Minister.
(2) The annual report to be submitted pursuant to
clause (1) shall set out, inter alia, the number of advices
and opinions on constitutional and legal matters rendered
by him or her throughout the year, and short description
of such advices and opinions, details of cases instituted
as state cases, details of defence made in lawsuits in
which the Government of Nepal is a plaintiff or
defendant, details of reforms to be made in the future in

(109)

relation to cases to be instituted as state cases and
information relating to crime trends.
160.

Chief Attorney: (1) There shall be a Chief Attorney in
every State, who shall be subordinate to the Attorney
General.
(2) The Chief of State shall, on recommendation
of the concerned Chief Minister, appoint the Chief
Attorney. The Chief Attorney shall hold office during the
pleasure of the Chief Minister.
(3) A person who is qualified to be appointed as a
Judge of High Court shall be eligible to be appointed as
the Chief Attorney.
(4) The office of the Chief Attorney shall be
vacant in any of the following circumstances:
(a)

if he or she tenders resignation in writing
to the Chief of State through the Chief
Minister,

(b)

if he or she is removed from office by
the Chief of State on recommendation of
the Chief Minister,

(c)

if he or she dies.

(5) The Chief Attorney shall be the chief legal
advisor to the State Government. It shall be the duty of
the Chief Attorney to give opinions and advices on
constitutional and legal matters to the State Government
and such other authorities as the State Government may
specify.
(6) The Office of Attorney General shall manage
the employees under the Office of Chief Attorney.
(7) The remuneration and other facilities of the
Chief Attorney shall be similar to those of a Judge of
High Court. The functions, duties and powers and other
(110)

conditions of service of the Chief Attorney shall be as
provided for in the State law.
161.

Provisions relating to conditions of service and facilities:
Provisions relating to the remuneration, facilities and
conditions of service of the government attorneys and
other employees under the Attorney General shall be as
provided for in the Federal Act.

(111)

Part-13
State Executive
162.

Executive power of State: (1) The executive power of a
State shall, pursuant to this Constitution and the State
law, be vested in the State Council of Ministers.
Provided that if a State Executive does not exist
because of enforcement of Federal governance, the Chief
of State shall exercise the executive power of the State as
directed by the Government of Nepal.
(2) The responsibility for issuing general
directives, controlling and regulating the governance of
the State shall, subject to this Constitution and other
laws, lie in the State Council of Ministers.
(3) All State executive functions shall be
performed in the name of the State Government.
(4) The executive power of the State shall be as
mentioned in Schedule-6, Schedule-7 and Schedule-9
subject to this Constitution.
Provided that the State Council of Ministers shall
exercise the executive powers in coordination with the
Government of Nepal, except as explicitly mentioned in
this Constitution and in the Federal law in relation to
concurrent powers of the Federation and the State.
(5) Any decision or order to be issued in the
name of the State Government pursuant to clause (3) and
other instruments of authorization pertaining thereto
shall be authenticated as provided for in the State law.

163.

Provisions relating to Chief of State: (1) There shall be a
Chief of State in each State, as a representative of the
Government of Nepal.
(2) The President shall appoint one Chief of State
for each State.
(112)

(3) The term of office of a Chief of State shall be
five years except where the President removes him or her
from office prior to the expiration of his or her term of
office.
(4) A person may not be the Chief of State for
more than once in the same State.
164.

165.

Qualification for Chief of State: A person who has the
following qualification shall be qualified to become the
Chief of State:
(a)

being qualified for being a member of the
Federal Parliament,

(b)

having completed the age of thirty five
years, and

(c)

not being disqualified by any law.

Vacation of office of Chief of State: (1) The office of the
Chief of State shall become vacant in any of the
following circumstances:
(a)

if he or she tenders resignation in writing
to the President,

(b)

if his or her term of office expires and he
or she is removed from office by the
President prior to expiration of the term,

(c)

if he or she dies.

(2) If the office of the Chief of State of any State
falls vacant, the President may so designate the Chief of
State of another State to act as such also for such State.
166.

Functions, duties and powers of Chief of State: (1) The
Chief of State shall exercise such powers and perform
such duties as conferred to him or her pursuant to this
Constitution or law.

(113)

(2) In exercising the powers or duties under
clause (1), the Chief of State shall perform all other
functions to be performed by him or her on
recommendation and with the consent of the State
Council of Ministers than those functions specifically
provided to be performed on recommendation of any
body or official pursuant to this Constitution or law.
Such recommendation and consent shall be submitted
through the Chief Minister.
(3) Any decision or order to be issued in the
name of the Chief of State under clause (2) and other
instrument of authorization pertaining thereto shall be
authenticated as provided for in the State law.
167.

Oath by Chief of State: The Chief of State shall, prior to
assuming office, take an oath of office and secrecy
before the President, as provided for in the Federal law.

168.

Constitution of State Council of Ministers: (1) The Chief
of State shall appoint the leader of the parliamentary
party commanding a majority in the State Assembly as
the Chief Minister, and the State Council of Ministers
shall be constituted under his or her chairpersonship.
(2) In cases where no party has a clear majority
in the State Assembly under clause (1), the Chief of State
shall appoint as the Chief Minister a member of the State
Assembly who can command majority with the support
of two or more parties representing to the State
Assembly.
(3) In cases where the Chief Minister cannot be
appointed under clause (2) no later than thirty days after
the date of declaration of the final results of election to
the State Assembly or the Chief Minister so appointed
fails to secure a vote of confidence under clause (4), the
Chief of State shall appoint as the Chief Minister the

(114)

parliamentary party leader of the party which has the
highest number of members in the State Assembly.
(4) The Chief Minister appointed under clause (2)
or (3) shall obtain a vote of confidence from the State
Assembly no later than thirty days after the date of such
appointment.
(5) In cases where the Chief Minister appointed
under clause (3) fails to obtain a vote of confidence
under clause (4) and any member under clause (2)
presents a ground on which he or she can obtain a vote
of confidence in the State Assembly, the Chief of State
shall appoint such a member as the Chief Minister.
(6) The Chief Minister appointed under clause (5)
must obtain a vote of confidence under clause (4).
(7) In cases where the Chief Minister appointed
under clause (5) fails to obtain a vote of confidence or
the Chief Minister cannot be appointed, the Chief of
State shall, on recommendation of the Chief Minister,
dissolve the State Assembly and appoint a date of
election so that the election to another State Assembly is
completed within six months.
(8) Procedures on the appointment of the Chief
Minister under this Article must be completed no later
than thirty five days after the date of declaration of the
final results of election to the State Assembly held under
this Constitution or the date on which the office of the
Chief Minister has fallen vacant.
(9) The Chief of State shall, on recommendation
of the Chief Minister, constitute the State Council of
Ministers consisting of a maximum of twenty percent of
the total number of members of the State Assembly,
including the Chief Minister, in accordance with the

(115)

inclusive principle, from amongst the members of the
State Assembly.
Explanation: For the purposes of this Article,
"Minister" means a Minister, Minister of State and
Assistant Minister.
(10) The Chief Minister and Ministers shall be
collectively responsible to State Assembly, and the
Ministers shall be individually responsible for the work
of their respective Ministries to the Chief Minister and
the State Assembly.
169.

Vacation of office of Chief Minister and Minister: (1)
The office of the Chief Minister shall be vacant in any of
the following circumstances:
(a)

if he or she tenders resignation in writing
to the Chief of State,

(b)

if a vote of no-confidence is passed
against him or her under Article 188 or a
vote of confidence is not passed,

(c)

if he or she ceases to be a member of the
State Assembly,

(d)

if he or she dies.

(2) The office of a Minister shall be vacant in
any of the following circumstances:
(a)

if he or she tenders resignation in writing
to the Chief Minister,

(b)

if the Chief Minister removes him or her
from office,

(c)

if the office of the Chief Minister falls
vacant under sub-clause (a), (b) or (c) of
clause (1),

(d)

if he or she dies.
(116)

(3) Even though the office of the Chief Minister
falls vacant under clause (1), the same Council of
Ministers shall continue to act until another State
Council of Ministers is constituted.
Provided that if the Chief Minister dies, the
senior-most Minister shall act as the Chief Minister until
a new Chief Minister is appointed.
170.

Appointment of non-member of State Assembly as
Minister: (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in
clause (9) of Article 168, the Chief of State may, on the
recommendation of the Chief Minister, appoint any
person who is not a member of the State Assembly as a
Minister.
(2) A Minister appointed under clause (1) must
obtain membership of the State Assembly within six
months from the date of taking an oath by him or her.
(3) In the event of failure to obtain membership
of the State Assembly within the period mentioned in
clause (2), he or she shall not be eligible to be
reappointed to the office of Minister during the term of
the then State Assembly.
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in clause
(1), a person who has been defeated in the election to the
then State Assembly shall be not eligible to be appointed
to the office of Minister under clause (1) during the term
of such State Assembly.

171.

Remuneration and other Facilities of Chief Minister and
Minister: The remuneration and other facilities of the
Chief Minister and Ministers shall be as provided by a
State Act, and until such Act is made, shall be as
specified by the State Government.

172.

Oath: The Chief Minister and Ministers shall, before
assuming their respective offices, take an oath of office
(117)

and secrecy before the Chief of State, and Ministers of
State and Assistant Ministers, before the Chief Minister,
as provided for in the State law.
173.

174.

To give information to Chief of State: The Chief
Minister shall inform the Chief of State about the
following matters:
(a)

resolutions
Ministers,

of

the

State

Council

of

(b)

Bills to be introduced in the State
Assembly,

(c)

such other necessary information as
commanded by the Chief of State on
matters set forth in clauses (a) and (b), and

(d)

current general state of affairs of the State.

Transaction of business of State Government: (1) The
allocation and transaction of business of the State
Government shall be carried out in accordance with the
rules approved by the State Government.
(2) No question shall be raised in any court as to
whether or not the rules under clause (1) have been
observed.

(118)

Part-14
State Legislature
175.

State Legislature: The legislature of a State shall be
unicameral, which shall be called as the State Assembly.

176.

Composition of State Assembly: (1) Each State
Assembly shall consist of a number of members, as
follows:
(a)

members in a number that is twice as
many as the number of members elected
to the House of Representatives from the
concerned State, through the first past
the post electoral system,

(b)

the number of members to be set under
clause (a) shall be considered to be sixty
percent, and the rest forty percent
members to be elected, through the
proportional electoral system.

(2) Election constituencies shall be set on the
basis of geography and population as provided for in the
Federal law, for the election to members under subclause (a) of clause (1).
(3) Sixty percent members of the State Assembly
shall be elected in accordance with the first past the post
electoral system and the forty percent members in
accordance with the proportional electoral system.
(4) Election to the members of the State
Assembly under clause (3) shall be held through adult
suffrage by secret ballots in accordance with law.
(5) Each citizen of Nepal who resides within the
territory of the State and who has completed the age of
eighteen years shall have a right to vote in any one
election constituency in accordance with law.
(119)

(6) The Federal law shall provide that, in fielding
candidacy by political parties for the election to the State
Assembly under the proportional electoral system,
representation shall be ensured on the basis of a closed
list also from women, Dalit, indigenous, indigenous
nationalities, Khas Arya, Madhesi, Tharu, Muslims and
backward regions, minority communities, on the basis of
population. In so fielding candidacy, regard shall also be
had to geographical balance of the concerned State.
Explanation: For the purposes of this clause,
"Khas Arya" means Kshetri, Brahmin, Thakuri, Sanyasi
(Dashnami) community.
(7) In fielding candidacy under clause (6),
political parties must provide for representation of the
persons with disabilities as well.
(8) If the seat of a member of the State Assembly
falls vacant while its term still remains for more than six
months, the vacancy shall be filled through the same
electoral system as through which such seat was filled in.
(9)
Notwithstanding
anything
contained
elsewhere in this Article, at least one third of the total
number of members elected from each political party
representing in the State Assembly must be women. If
women are not so elected as to constitute one third of the
elected members of any political party under sub-clause
(a) of clause (1), such political party must, in electing
members under sub-clause (b) of that clause, so elect that
women members constitute at least one third of the total
number of members elected to the State Assembly from
that party.
(10) A person who is qualified under Article 178
and entitled to vote in an election to the members of the
State Assembly may, subject to law, be a candidate in
any election constituency of the State.
(120)

Provided that a person shall not be a candidate in
more than one election constituencies at the same time.
(11) Other provisions relating to election to the
State Assembly shall be as provided for in the Federal
law.
177.

Term of State Assembly: (1) Unless dissolved earlier
pursuant to this Constitution, the term of the State
Assembly shall be five years.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in clause
(1), the term of the State Assembly may be extended by
a State Act for a period not exceeding one year in cases
where a proclamation or order of a state of emergency is
in effect.
(3) The term of the State Assembly extended
under clause (2) shall ipso facto be terminated after the
expiry of six months from the date of voidance of the
proclamation or order of the state of emergency in the
concerned State.

178.

Qualification for member of State Assembly: (1) A
person who has the following qualification shall be
qualified to become a member of the State Assembly:
(a)

being a citizen of Nepal,

(b)

being a voter of the concerned State,

(c)

having completed the age of twenty five
years,

(d)

not having been convicted of a criminal
offense involving moral turpitude,

(e)

not being disqualified by any law, and

(f)

not holding any office of profit.

Explanation: For the purposes of this clause,
"office of profit" means any position, other than a
(121)

political position which is to be filled by election or
nomination, for which a remuneration or economic
benefit is paid out of a government fund.
(2) If a person who holds a political office to be
filled by way of election, nomination or appointment is
elected as a member of the State Assembly under this
Part, his or her such office shall ipso facto be vacant with
effect from the day on which he or she takes an oath of
such office.
179.

Oath of member of State Assembly: Every member of
the State Assembly must, before taking part for the first
time in the meeting of the Assembly or any of its
committees, take an oath as provided for in the State law.

180.

Vacation of seat of member of State Assembly: The seat
of a member of the State Assembly shall become vacant
in any of the following circumstances:
(a)

if he or she tenders resignation in writing
before the Speaker of the State Assembly,

(b)

if he or she is no longer qualified or ceases
to possess the qualification under Article
178,

(c)

if the term of the State Assembly expires or
it is dissolved,

(d)

if he or she absents himself or herself from
ten consecutive meetings, without giving
notice to the State Assembly,

(e)

if the political party of which he or she was
a member when elected provides a
notification as provided for in the Federal
law that he or she has defected from the
party,

(f)

If he or she dies.
(122)

181.

Decision as to disqualification of member: If a question
arises as to whether any member of the State Assembly
is disqualified or has ceased to possess any of the
qualifications under Article 178, the Constitutional
Bench of the Supreme Court shall make the final
decision of such question.

182.

Speaker and Deputy Speaker of State Assembly: (1) The
members of the State Assembly shall, not later than
fifteen days of the date of holding of the first meeting of
the State Assembly, elect a State Speaker and a Deputy
State Speaker from amongst themselves.
(2) Election under clause (1) shall be so held that
there is one woman out of the State Speaker and the
Deputy State Speaker, and the State Speaker and the
Deputy State Speaker of the State Assembly shall be
representatives from different parties.
Provided that if there is no representation of more
than one party in the State Assembly or no candidacy is
filed by more than one party despite representation,
nothing shall prevent the members of the same party
from being the State Speaker and the Deputy State
Speaker of the State Assembly.
(3) If the office of the State Speaker or the
Deputy State Speaker falls vacant, the members of the
State Assembly shall fill the vacancy through election to
the State Speaker or the Deputy State Speaker from
amongst themselves.
(4) The Deputy State Speaker shall, in the
absence of the State Speaker of the State Assembly,
chair the State Assembly.
(5) If the election to the State Speaker and the
Deputy State Speaker has not taken place, or if both the
positions have become vacant, the attending member
(123)

who is by age the senior-most shall chair the meeting of
the State Assembly.
(6) The office of the State Speaker or the Deputy
State Speaker of the State Assembly shall become vacant
in any of the following circumstances:
(a)

if he or she ceases to be a member of the
State Assembly,
Provided that, in the event of the
dissolution of the State Assembly, the
State Speaker and the Deputy State
Speaker of the State Assembly holding
their respective offices shall continue in
office until the previous day of the filing
of nominations for another election to
the State Assembly,

(b)

if he or she resigns in writing,

(c)

if a resolution is passed by a majority of
two-thirds of the total number of the then
members of the State Assembly to the
effect that his or her conduct is not
compatible with his or her office.

(7) The State Deputy Speaker shall preside over a
meeting at which deliberations are to be held on a
motion that the conduct of the Speaker of the State
Assembly is not compatible with his or her office. The
State Speaker shall be entitled to take part and vote in the
deliberations on such motion.
183.

Summoning and prorogation of session of State
Assembly: (1) The Chief of State shall summon a session
of the State Assembly within twenty days of the
declaration of final results of the election to the State
Assembly. Thereafter, the Chief of State shall, from time

(124)

to time, summon other sessions pursuant to this
Constitution.
Provided that the interval between the two
consecutive sessions shall not exceed six months.
(2) The Chief of State may prorogue the sessions
of the State Assembly.
(3) If, during the prorogation or recess of the
session of the State Assembly, one-fourth of the total
number of its members make a petition that it is
expedient to convene a session or meeting, the Chief of
State shall specify the date and time for such session or
meeting. The State Assembly shall meet or commence its
session at the date and time so specified.
184.

Address by Chief of State: (1) The Chief of State may
address a sitting of the State Assembly, and summon the
members for that purpose.
(2) The Chief of State shall address the first
session after an election to the State Assembly and a
sitting of the State Assembly after the commencement of
the first session of each year.

185.

Quorum of State Assembly: Except as otherwise
provided for in this Constitution, no question or motion
shall be presented for decision in the State Assembly
unless one-fourth of the total number of its members are
present.

186.

Voting in State Assembly: All questions submitted for
decision in the State Assembly shall be decided by a
majority vote of the members present and participate in
voting. The member chairing the meeting shall not have
the right to vote.
Provided that he or she may exercise his or her
casting vote in the case of a tie.
(125)

187.

Privileges of State Assembly: (1) There shall be full
freedom of speech in the State Assembly, subject to this
Constitution, and no member shall be arrested, detained
or prosecuted in any court for anything expressed or any
vote cast by him or her in the State Assembly.
(2) The State Assembly shall, subject to this
Constitution, have full power to regulate and decide its
internal business, and it shall be the exclusive right of the
State Assembly to decide whether or not any of its
proceedings is regular or irregular. No question shall be
raised in any court in this behalf.
(3) No comment shall be made about the good
faith concerning any proceeding of the State Assembly,
and no publication and broadcasting of any kind shall be
made about anything said by any member, intentionally
distorting or misinterpreting the meaning of the speech.
(4) The provisions of clauses (1) and (3) shall
also apply to other persons who are entitled to participate
in the meetings of the State Assembly than the members
of State Assembly.
(5) No proceedings shall be initiated in any court
against any person in respect of the publication, under
the authority granted by the State Assembly, of any
document, report, vote or proceeding.
Explanation: For the purposes of this clause and
clauses (1), (2), (3) and (4), "State Assembly" means and
includes the meeting of a committee of the State
Assembly.
(6) No member of the State Assembly may be
arrested during the period from the issuance of a notice
summoning the session to its prorogation.
Provided that nothing in this clause shall be
deemed to prevent the arrest under the law of any
(126)

member on a criminal charge. If any member is so
arrested, the authority making such arrest shall forthwith
give information thereof to the person presiding over the
State Assembly.
(7) Any breach of the privileges shall be deemed
to constitute contempt of the State Assembly, and the
State Assembly shall have the exclusive right to decide
whether any breach of its privileges has taken place.
(8) If any person is in contempt of the State
Assembly, the person presiding over the State Assembly
may, after a decision by the State Assembly to that
effect, admonish, warn or impose a sentence of
imprisonment for a term not exceeding three months or
of a fine not exceeding ten thousand rupees on such
person, and such fine shall be recovered as a government
due.
Provided that if such a person submits an apology
to the satisfaction of the State Assembly, it may either
pardon him or her or remit or commute the sentence
imposed on him or her.
(9) Other matters relating to privileges of the
State Assembly shall be as provided in the State law.
188.

Provisions relating to vote of confidence and motion of
no-confidence: (1) The Chief Minister may, whenever he
or she considers necessary or appropriate to show that he
or she has confidence from the State Assembly, table a
resolution to that effect in the State Assembly for the
vote of confidence.
(2) If the political party which the Chief Minister
represents is divided or a political party in coalition State
Government withdraws its support, the Chief Minister
shall table a resolution in the State Assembly for a vote
of confidence within thirty days.
(127)

(3) If a resolution tabled under clauses (1) and (2)
is not passed by a majority of the total number of then
members of the State Assembly, the Chief Minister shall
relieve of his or her office.
(4) One-fourth of the total number of then
members of the State Assembly may table in writing a
motion of no-confidence against the Chief Minister.
Provided that a motion of no confidence may not
be tabled until the first two years after the appointment
of the Chief Minister and until another one year after the
date of failure of the motion of no confidence once
tabled.
(5) A motion of no confidence to be tabled under
clause (4) shall also indicate the name of a member
proposed for Chief Minister.
(6) If a motion of no confidence tabled under
clause (4) is passed by a majority of the total number of
then members of the State Assembly, the Chief Minister
shall relieve of his or her office.
(7) If the office of the Chief Minister falls vacant
because of the passage of a vote of no-confidence under
clause (6), the Chief of State shall, in accordance with
Article 168, appoint as the Chief Minister the member of
the State Assembly proposed under clause (5).
189.

Minister, Minister of State and Assistant Minister
entitled to take part in meetings of State Assembly: The
Minister, Minister of State and Assistant Minister shall
be entitled to attend, and take part in the proceedings and
deliberations of, the State Assembly or its committees.
Provided that a Minister, Minister of State or
Assistant Minister who is not a member of the State
Assembly shall not be entitled to vote in a meeting of the
State Assembly or its committee, and a Minister,
(128)

Minister of State or Assistant Minister shall not be
entitled to vote in a meeting of a committee of which he
or she is not a member.
190.

Penalty for unauthorized presence or voting in State
Assembly: If a person who has not taken oath under
Article 179 or who is not a member of the State
Assembly is present or votes in a meeting of the State
Assembly or of its committee as a member, the person
shall, by order of the person chairing the meeting, be
fined with a sum of five thousand rupees for each
instance of such presence or voting, and such a fine shall
be recovered as a government due.

191.

Restriction on discussion: No discussion shall be held in
the State Assembly on any matters that may cause
adverse effect on the dispensation of justice on any cases
which are sub judice in any courts of Nepal and on any
judicial acts done by Judges in the course of performance
of their duties.

192.

Transaction of business in case of vacancy in seat of
member: The State Assembly shall have the power to
transact its business notwithstanding any vacancy in the
seat of its member; and no proceedings of the State
Assembly already conducted shall become invalid even
if it is subsequently discovered that a person who was
not so entitled took part in such proceedings.

193.

Power of State Assembly to form committees: The State
Assembly may, in accordance with its rules, form
committees or special committees, as required, in order
to manage its working procedures.

194.

Procedures relating to conduct of business of State
Assembly: The State Assembly shall frame rules to
conduct its business, maintain order during its meetings
and regulate the constitution, functions and procedures
of, and other matters relating to, its committees. Until
(129)

such rules are framed, the State Assembly shall regulate
its procedures on its own.
195.

Secretary and Secretariat of State Assembly: (1) The
Chief of State shall appoint the Secretary of the State
Assembly on recommendation of the Speaker of State
Assembly.
(2) There shall be a Secretariat for conducting
and managing the business of the State Assembly. The
establishment of such Secretariat and other matters
related thereto shall be as provided for in the State law.
(3) The qualification, functions, duties, powers
and other conditions of service of the Secretary of the
State Assembly shall be as provided for in the State law.

196.

Remuneration: The remuneration and facilities of the
Speaker and the Deputy Speaker of the State Assembly
shall be as provided for in the State law, and as specified
by the State Government until such law is made.

(130)

Part-15
State Legislative Procedures
197.

Legislative powers of State Assembly: The legislative
powers of the State Assembly shall be as contained in
lists of Schedule-6, Schedule-7 and Schedule-9.

198.

Procedures for introduction of Bills in State Assembly:
(1) A Bill may, subject to this Constitution, be introduced
in the State Assembly.
(2) A Money Bill and a Bill concerning peace and
security may be introduced only as a Government Bill.
(3) "Money Bill" means a Bill concerning any or
all of the following subjects:
(a)

the imposition, collection, abolition,
remission, alteration or regulation of
taxes in the State,

(b)

the
preservation
of
the
State
Consolidated Fund or any other State
Government Fund, the deposit of
moneys into and the appropriation or the
withdrawal of moneys from such Funds,
or the reduction, increment or
cancellation of appropriations or of
proposed expenditures from such Funds,

(c)

the regulation of matters relating to the
borrowing of money or the giving of
guarantee by the State Government, or
any matter pertaining to the amendment
of the law with respect to any financial
obligations undertaken or to be
undertaken by the State Government,

(d)

the custody and investment of all
revenues received by any State
(131)

Government Fund, moneys acquired
through the repayment of loans, and
grant moneys; or audits of the accounts
of the State Government, or
(e)

other incidental matters directly related
to any of the subjects specified in clause
(a), (b), (c) or (d).

Provided that any Bill shall not be deemed to be a
Money Bill by the reason only that it provides for the
levying of any charges or fees such as license fee,
application fee, renewal fee or for the imposition of fines
or penalty of imprisonment.
(4) If any question arises whether a Bill is a
Money Bill or not, the decision of the Speaker of State
Assembly thereon shall be final.
199.

Procedures for passage of Bills: (1) A Bill passed by the
State Assembly shall be presented to the Chief of State
for assent.
(2) If a session of the State Assembly terminates
while a Bill is under consideration, deliberations on the
Bill may continue at the succeeding session.
Provided that if the State Assembly is dissolved
or its term expires when any Bill is under its
consideration, such a Bill shall lapse.

200.

Withdrawal of Bills: A member who has introduced a
Bill may, with the approval of the State Assembly,
withdraw the Bill.

201.

Assent on Bills: (1) A Bill which is to be presented to the
Chief of State for assent under Article 199 shall be so
presented by the Speaker of State Assembly after it has
been certified by him or her.

(132)

Provided that in the case of a Money Bill, the
Speaker of State Assembly shall so certify.
(2) A Bill presented to the Chief of State for his
or her assent shall be assented to within fifteen days, and
the State Assembly shall be informed thereof as soon as
possible.
(3) Except for a Money Bill, if the Chief of State
is of the opinion that any Bill needs further deliberations,
he or she may send back the Bill with his or her message
to the State Assembly within fifteen days from the date
of presentation of the Bill to him or her.
(4) If any Bill is sent back with his or her
message by the Chief of State under clause (3), it shall
be reconsidered by the State Assembly and if the Bill so
reconsidered is again passed as it was or with
amendments, and is again presented to him or her, the
Chief of State shall give assent to that Bill within fifteen
days of such presentation.
(5) A Bill shall become an Act after the Chief of
State gives assent to it.
202.

Ordinance: (1) If, at any time, except when the State
Assembly is in session, a circumstance exists which
renders it necessary to take immediate action, the Chief
of State may, on the recommendation of the State
Council of Ministers, promulgate an Ordinance.
(2) An Ordinance promulgated under clause (1)
shall have the same force and effect as an Act.
Provided that every such Ordinance:
(a)

shall be tabled at the session of the State
Assembly held after the promulgation,
and if not passed by the State Assembly,
it shall ipso facto cease to be effective,
(133)

(b)

may be repealed at any time by the Chief
of State, and

(c)

shall, unless rendered ineffective or
repealed under sub-clause (a) or (b), ipso
facto cease to be effective at the
expiration of sixty days after the day on
which a meeting of the State Assembly
is held.

(134)

Part-16
State Financial Procedures
203.

No tax to be levied or loan to be raised: (1) No tax shall
be levied and collected in a State except in accordance
with law.
(2) No loan shall be raised and guarantee given
by the State Government except as provided for in the
Federal law.

204.

State Consolidated Fund: Except for the revenues of
trusts (Guthi), all revenues received by the State
Government, all loans raised on the security of revenues,
all moneys received in repayment of any loans made
under the authority of any State Act and any mounts of
grants or loans received from the Government of Nepal
shall, except as otherwise provided for in the State Act,
be credited to a State Government Fund to be known as
the State Consolidated Fund.

205.

Expenditures from State Consolidated Fund or State
Government Fund: No expenditure shall be incurred out
of the State Consolidated Fund or any other State
Government Fund except the following:
(a)

moneys charged on the State Consolidated
Fund,

(b)

moneys required to meet the expenditure
under an Appropriation Act,

(c)

advance moneys authorized by an Act
required to meet expenditures, when an
Appropriation Bill is under consideration,
or

(d)

expenditures
to
be
incurred
in
extraordinary circumstances under a Vote

(135)

of Credit Act which contains only a
description of expenditures.
Provided that matters relating to the State
Contingency Fund shall be in accordance with
Article 212.
206.

207.

Expenditures chargeable on State Consolidated Fund:
The expenditures relating to the following matters shall
be charged on the State Consolidated Fund, and approval
of the State Assembly shall not be required for such
expenditures:
(a)

the amount required as remuneration and
facilities payable to the State Speaker and
the State Deputy Speaker,

(b)

the amount required as remuneration and
facilities payable to the Chairperson and
members of the State Public Service
Commission,

(c)

all charges relating to debts for which the
State Government is liable,

(d)

any sum required to satisfy any judgment
or decree made by a court against the
State Government, and

(e)

any other sum specified by a State law to
be chargeable on the State Consolidated
Fund.

Estimates of revenues and expenditures: (1) The State
Minister for Finance shall, in respect of every financial
year, lay before the State Assembly an annual estimate
setting out, inter alia, the following matters:
(a)

an estimate of revenues,

(b)

the moneys required to meet the charges
on the State Consolidated Fund, and
(136)

(c)

the moneys required to meet the
expenditure to be provided for by a State
Appropriation Act.

(2) The annual estimate to be laid pursuant to
clause (1) shall also be accompanied by a statement of
the expenses allocated to every Ministry in the previous
financial year and particulars of whether the objectives
of the expenses have been achieved.
208.

State Appropriation Act: The moneys required to meet
the expenditure to be provided for by any State
Appropriation Act shall be specified under appropriate
heads in an Appropriation Bill.

209.

Supplementary estimates: (1) The State Minister for
Finance may lay before the State Assembly a supplementary
estimate if it is found in any financial year,(a)

that the sum authorized to be spent for a
particular
service
by the
State
Appropriation Act for the current
financial year is insufficient, or that a
need has arisen for expenditures upon
some new service not provided for in the
State Appropriation Act for that year, or

(b)

that the expenditures made during that
financial year are in excess of the amount
authorized by the State Appropriation Act.

(2) The sums included in the supplementary
estimates shall be specified under the heads in a
Supplementary Appropriation Bill.
210.

Votes on Account: (1) Notwithstanding anything
contained elsewhere in this Part, a portion of the
expenditure estimated for the financial year may, when a
State Appropriation Bill is under consideration, be
incurred in advance under a State Act.
(137)

(2) A Vote on Account Bill shall not be
introduced until the estimates of revenues and
expenditures have been laid in accordance with Article
207, and the sums involved in the Vote on Account shall
not exceed one-third of the estimate of expenditures for
the financial year.
(3) The expenditures incurred in accordance with
the State Vote on Account Act shall be included in the
State Appropriation Bill.
211.

Votes of Credit: Notwithstanding anything contained
elsewhere in this Part, if owing to an emergency due to
natural causes or other reasons, it appears to be
impractical or inexpedient in view of the security or
interest of the State to specify the details required under
clause (1) of Article 207, the State Minister for Finance
may lay before the State Assembly a Vote of Credit Bill
giving only a statement of expenditures.

212.

State Contingency Fund: (1) A State Act may create a
Fund to be known as the State Contingency Fund into
which shall be paid from time to time such moneys as
may be determined by the State Act.
(2) The Fund under clause (1) shall be under the
control of the State Government. Any unforeseen
expenditure may be met out of such Fund by the State
Government.
(3) The amount of the expenditure under clause
(2) shall be reimbursed as soon as possible by the State
Act.

213.

Act relating to financial procedures: Matters relating to
the transfer of moneys appropriated by the State Act
from one head to another and other financial procedures
shall be as provided for in the State Act.

(138)

Part-17
Local Executive
214.

Executive power of Local Level: (1) The executive
power of the Local Level shall, pursuant to this
Constitution and the Federal law, be vested in the Village
Executive or the Municipal Executive.
(2) The local executive power shall be as
mentioned in Schedule-8 and Schedule-9.
(3) The responsibility for issuing general
directives, controlling and regulating the governance of
the Village Body and the Municipality shall, subject to
this Constitution and other laws, lie in the Village
Executive and the Municipal Executive.
(4) The executive functions of the Village Body
and the Municipality shall be performed in the name of
the Village Executive and the Municipal Executive.
(5) Any decision or order to be issued in the
name of the Village Executive and the Municipal
Executive pursuant to clause (4) and other instruments of
authorization pertaining thereto shall be authenticated as
provided for in the Local law.

215.

Provisions relating to Chairperson and Vice-Chairperson
of Village Executive: (1) There shall be a Chairperson of
Village Executive in each Village Body. The Village
Executive shall be formed under his or her
chairpersonship.
(2) The Village Executive under clause (1) shall
consist of one Vice-Chairperson, Ward Chairperson
elected from each Ward and members elected pursuant to
clause (4).
(3) The Chairperson and the Vice-Chairperson
shall be elected by the voters residing within the
(139)

concerned Village Body area by secret ballots on the
basis of one person one vote, in accordance with the first
past the post electoral system.
Explanation: For the purposes of this Article,
"Chairperson" and "Vice-Chairperson" mean the
Chairperson and the Vice-Chairperson of the Village
Executive.
(4) The members of the Village Executive shall
also include four women members elected by the
members of the Village Assembly from amongst
themselves and two members elected by the Village
Assembly from the Dalit or minority communities, in
possession of the qualification under clause (5), no later
than fifteen days after the final results of the election to
the Village Assembly under Article 222.
(5) A person who has the following qualification
shall be qualified to be elected to the office of the
Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson, Ward Chairperson and
member:
(a)

being a citizen of Nepal,

(b)

having completed the age of twenty
one years,

(c)

being a voter whose name is included
in the electoral rolls of the Village
Body,

(d)

not being disqualified by any law.

(6) The term of office of the Chairperson, ViceChairperson, Ward Chairperson and member shall be
five years after the date of being elected.
(7) A person who has been elected as the
Chairperson for two terms shall not be eligible to be a
candidate in an election to the Village Body.
(140)

(8) The office of the Chairperson, ViceChairperson, Ward Chairperson or member shall become
vacant in any of the following circumstances:
(a) if the Chairperson tenders resignation
in writing to the Vice-Chairperson, and
if the Vice-Chairperson tenders
resignation before the Chairperson,
(b) if his or her term of office expires,
(c) if he or she dies.
(9) If the seat falls
the term of office of
Chairperson still remains
vacancy shall be filled
remainder of term.
216.

vacant under clause (7) while
the Chairperson or Vicefor more than one year, the
through by-election for the

Provisions relating to Mayor and Deputy Mayor of
Municipal Executive: (1) Each Municipality shall have a
Mayor. The Municipal Executive shall be formed under
his or her chairpersonship.
(2) The Municipal Executive under clause (1)
shall consist of one Deputy Mayor, Ward Chairperson
elected from each Ward and members elected pursuant to
clause (4).
(3) The Mayor and the Deputy Mayor shall be
elected by the voters residing within the concerned
Municipal area by secret ballots on the basis of one
person one vote, in accordance with the first past the post
electoral system.
Explanation: For the purposes of this Article, "Mayor"
and "Deputy Mayor" mean the Mayor and the Deputy
Mayor of the Municipal Executive.
(4) The members of the Municipal Executive
shall also include five women members elected by the
(141)

members of the Municipal Assembly from amongst
themselves and three members elected by the Municipal
Assembly from the Dalit or minority communities, in
possession of the qualification under clause (5), no later
than fifteen days after the final results of the election to
the Municipal Assembly under Article 223.
(5) A person who has the following qualification
shall be qualified to be elected to the office of the Mayor,
Deputy Mayor, Ward Chairperson and member:
(a)

being a citizen of Nepal,

(b)

having completed the age of twenty one
years,

(c)

being a voter whose name is included in
the electoral rolls of the Municipality,

(d)

not being disqualified by any law.

(6) The term of office of the Mayor, Deputy
Mayor, Ward Chairperson and member shall be five
years after the date of being elected.
(7) A person who has been elected as the Mayor
for two terms shall not be eligible to be a candidate in an
election to the Municipality.
(8) The office of the Mayor, Deputy Mayor, Ward
Chairperson or Member shall become vacant in any of
the following circumstances:
(a)

if the Mayor tenders resignation in
writing to the Deputy Mayor, and if the
Deputy Mayor tenders resignation in
writing before the Mayor,

(b)

if his or her term of office expires,

(c)

if he or she dies.

(142)

(9) If the seat falls vacant under clause (8) while
the term of office of the Mayor or Deputy Mayor still
remains for more than one year, the vacancy shall be
filled through by-election for the remainder of term.
217.

Judicial Committee: (1) There shall be a three-member
judicial committee to be coordinated by its ViceChairperson in the case of a Village Body and by its
Deputy Mayor in the case of a Municipality, in order to
settle disputes under their respective jurisdictions in
accordance with law.
(2) The judicial committee under clause (1) shall
consist of two members elected by the members of the
Village Assembly or the Municipal Assembly from
amongst themselves.

218.

Conduct of business of Village Executive and Municipal
Executive: Allocation and conduct of business of the
Village Executive and the Municipal Executive shall be
carried out in accordance with the rules approved by the
Village Executive and the Municipal Executive,
respectively.

219.

Other provisions relating to Local Level Executive:
Other provisions relating to the Local Level Executive,
except those contained in this Part, shall be as provided
for in the Federal law, subject to this Constitution.

220.

District Assembly and District Coordination Committee:
(1) There shall be a District Assembly to make
coordination between the Village Bodies and
Municipalities within the district.
(2) The District Assembly shall consist of
Chairpersons and Vice-Chairpersons of Village
Executives, and Mayors and Deputy Mayors of
Municipal Executives within the district. The first
meeting of the District Assembly shall be held no later
(143)

than thirty days of the date of final results of the election
to the Village Assemblies and the Municipal Assemblies.
(3) The District Assembly shall elect the District
Coordination Committee consisting of a maximum of
nine Members including one Chief, one Deputy Chief, at
least three women and at least one Dalit or minority. The
District Coordination Committee shall discharge all
functions required to be discharged by the District
Assembly.
(4) A Member of a Village Assembly or Municipal
Assembly within the concerned district shall be eligible
to be a candidate for the office of Chief, Deputy Chief or
Member of the District Coordination Committee. If
elected to the office of Chief, Deputy Chief or Member
of the District Coordination Committee, his or her office
of Member of Village Assembly or of Municipal
Assembly shall ipso facto lapse.
(5) The term of office of the Chief, Deputy Chief
and member of the District Coordination Committee
shall be five years after the date of being elected.
(6) The office of the Chief, Deputy Chief and
member of the District Coordination Committee shall
become vacant in any of the following circumstances:
(a)

if the Chief tenders resignation in
writing before the Deputy Chief, and if
the Deputy Chief or member tenders
resignation in writing before the Chief,

(b)

if his or her term of office expires,

(c)

if he or she dies.

(7) The functions, duties and powers of the
District Assembly shall be as follows:

(144)

(a)

to make coordination between the
Village Bodies and Municipalities within
the district,

(b)

to monitor development and construction
works to make balance of such works,

(c)

to make coordination between the
Federal and the State Government
offices and Village Bodies and
Municipalities in the district,

(d)

to perform other functions as provided
for in the State law.

(8) Provisions relating to the conduct of the
District Assembly, facilities of Members of the District
Coordination Committee and other matters relating to the
District Assembly shall be as provided for in the State
law.
Part-18
Local Legislature
221.

Legislative powers of Local Level: (1) The legislative
powers of the Local Level shall be vested in the Village
Assembly and the Municipal Assembly, subject to this
Constitution.
(2) The legislative powers of the Village
Assembly and the Municipal Assembly shall be as
mentioned in the lists contained in Schedule-8 and
Schedule-9.

222.

Composition of Village Assembly: (1) Each Village
Body shall have a Village Assembly.
(2) A Village Assembly under clause (1) shall
consist of the Chairperson and Vice-Chairperson of the
Village Executive, Ward Chairpersons, and four
members elected from each ward and Members of the
(145)

Village Executive elected from Dalit and minority
communities pursuant to clause (4) of Article 215.
(3) A Village Assembly to be formed under
clause (1) shall have representation of at least two
women from each ward.
(4) Each ward of a Village Body under the
Federal law shall have a Ward Committee composed of
the Ward Chairperson and four members. Such Ward
Chairperson and Ward members shall be elected in
accordance with the first past the post electoral system.
(5) Every person who has completed the age of
eighteen years and whose name is included in the
electoral rolls of the Village Body shall have a right to
vote as provided for in the Federal law.
(6) A person who has the following qualification
shall be qualified to become a candidate for the office of
the Member of the Village Assembly:
(a)

being a citizen of Nepal,

(b)

having completed the age of twenty one
years,

(c)

being his or her name included in the
electoral rolls of the Village Body, and

(d)

not being disqualified by any law.

(7) Matters relating to the election to the Village
Assembly and other matters pertaining thereto shall be as
provided for in the Federal law.
223.

Composition of Municipal Assembly: (1)
Municipality shall have a Municipal Assembly.

Each

(2) A Municipal Assembly under clause (1) shall
consist of the Mayor and the Deputy Mayor of the
Municipal Executive, Ward Chairpersons, and four
(146)

members elected from each Ward and members of the
Municipal Executive elected from Dalit or minority
communities pursuant to clause (4) of Article 216.
(3) A Municipal Assembly to be formed under
clause (1) shall have representation of at least two
women from each Ward.
(4) Each ward of a Municipality shall have a
Ward Committee composed of one Ward Chairperson
and four members as provided for in the Federal law.
Such Ward Chairperson and Ward members shall be
elected in accordance with the first past the post electoral
system.
(5) Every person who has completed the age of
eighteen years and whose name is included in the
electoral rolls of the Municipality shall have a right to
vote as provided for in the Federal law.
(6) A person who has the following qualification
shall be qualified to be a candidate for the office of
member of the Municipal Assembly:
(a)

being a citizen of Nepal,

(b)

having completed the age of twenty one
years,

(c)

being his or her name included in the
electoral rolls of the Municipality, and

(d)

not being disqualified by any law.

(7) Matters relating to the election to the
Municipal Assembly and other matters pertaining thereto
shall be as provided for in the Federal law.
224.

Chairperson and Vice-Chairperson of Village Assembly
and Municipal Assembly: The Chairperson and ViceChairperson of a Village Executive and the Mayor and
Deputy Mayor of a Municipal Executive shall ipso facto
(147)

be the Chairperson and Vice-Chairperson of the Village
Assembly and the Municipal Assembly, respectively,
and perform functions as such.
225.

Term of Village Assembly and Municipal Assembly:
The term of a Village Assembly and of a Municipal
Assembly shall be five years for the date of election.
Another Village Assembly and Municipal Assembly
shall be elected not later than six months of the
expiration of such a term.

226.

Powers to make law: (1) A Village Assembly and a
Municipal Assembly may make necessary laws on the
matters set forth in the Lists contained in Schedule-8 and
Schedule-9.
(2) The process for making laws under clause (1)
shall be as provided for in the State Law.

227.

Other provisions relating to Village Assembly and
Municipal Assembly: Other matters relating to the
conduct of business of a Village Assembly and
Municipal Assembly, rules of procedures of meetings,
formation of committees, conditions in which the office
of member falls vacant, facilities receivable by members
of the Village Assembly and Municipal Assembly and
employees and offices of the Village Body and
Municipality shall be as provided for in the State law.
Part-19
Local Financial Procedures

228.

No tax to be levied or loan to be raised: (1) No tax shall
be levied and collected and no loan raised in the Local
level except in accordance with law.
(2) The Local level may levy tax by law on
matters falling within its domain without prejudice to
national economic policies, carriage of goods and
(148)

services, capital and labour market, and the neighbouring
State or Local level.
229.

Local Consolidated Fund: (1) Each Village Body and
Municipality under the Local Level shall have one Local
Consolidate Fund. All revenues received by the Village
Body or Municipality, any amounts of grants received
from the Government of Nepal and the State
Government, all loans raised by the Village Body and
Municipality, and amounts received from other sources
shall be credited to such a Fund.
(2) Matters relating to expenditures from the
Local Consolidated Fund under clause (1) shall be as
provided for in the Local law.

230.

Estimates of revenues and expenditures of Village Body
and Municipality: (1) The Village Executive and the
Municipal Executive shall, subject to this Constitution,
lay an estimate of revenues and expenditures of every
financial year before, and have the estimate passed by,
the Village Assembly and the Municipal Assembly,
respectively, as provided for in the Local law.
(2)
If, in laying an estimate of revenues and
expenditures under clause (1), the Village Executive or
Municipal Executive is required to make a deficit
budget, it must purpose also the sources to meet the
deficit as provided for in the Federal law and the State
law.

(149)

Part-20
Interrelations between Federation, State and Local Level
231.

Legislative interrelations between Federation and States:
(1) The Federal Law may be made to be applicable to the
whole of, or, if required, to any part of, the territory of
Nepal.
(2) A State law may be made to be applicable to
the whole of, or as required, to any part of the territory of
the State.
(3) If two or more States make a request to the
Government of Nepal to make laws on any matter
enumerated in Schedule-6, the Federal Parliament may
make necessary laws. Such laws shall be applicable only
to the concerned States.

232.

Relations between Federation, State and Local level: (1)
The relations between the Federation, States, and Local
level shall be based on the principles of cooperation, coexistence and coordination.
(2) The Government of Nepal may, pursuant to
this Constitution and the Federal Law, give necessary
directions to any State Council of Ministers on matters of
national importance and on matters to be coordinated
between the States, and it shall be the duty of the
concerned State Council of Ministers to abide by such
directions.
(3) If any such type of act as may seriously
undermine the sovereignty, territorial integrity,
nationality or independence of Nepal is carried out in
any State, the President may, as required, warn such
State Council of Ministers, suspend or dissolve the State
Council of Ministers and the State Assembly for a period
not exceeding six months.

(150)

(4) Any suspension or dissolution of any State
Council of Ministers and State Assembly made pursuant
to clause (3) must get ratified by a two-thirds majority of
the total number of the then members of the Federal
Parliament within thirty five days.
(5) If dissolution made pursuant to clause (3) is
ratified by the Federal Parliament, election to the State
Assembly shall be held in such State within six months.
Provided that such suspension or dissolution shall
ipso facto be invalid if it is not ratified by the Federal
Parliament.
(6) The Federal ruling shall apply to such State
during the period of such suspension if the suspension
made pursuant to clause (3) is ratified pursuant to clause
(4) and until election to the State Assembly is held
pursuant to clause (5).
(7) During the continuance of the Federal rule,
the Federal Parliament may make laws with respect to
any matter enumerated in the List contained in Schedule6. Such laws shall continue to exist until repealed by
other laws made by the concerned State Assembly.
(8) The Government of Nepal may, directly or
through the State Government, render necessary
assistance to, and give necessary directives to, any
Village Executive or Municipal Executive, pursuant to
this Constitution and the Federal law. It shall be the duty
of the Village Executive or Municipal Executive to abide
by such directives.
233.

Relations between States: (1) One State shall render
assistance in the execution of legal provisions or judicial
and administrative decisions or orders of another State.
(2) A State may exchange information and
consult with another State on matters of common
(151)

concern and interest, coordinate each other on their
activities and legislations and extend mutual assistance.
(3) A State shall, in accordance with its State law,
provide equal security, treatment and facility to residents
of another State.
234.

Inter-State Council: (1) There shall be an Inter-State
Council as follows to settle political disputes arising
between the Federation and a State and between States:
(a)

Prime Minister

(b)

Minister for Home Affairs
of the Government of
Nepal

- Member

Minister for Finance of
the Government of Nepal

- Member

Chief Ministers of the
concerned States

- Member

(c)
(d)

- Chairperson

(2) The Inter-State Council may meet as required.
(3) The Inter-State Council may invite to its
meeting a Minister of the Government of Nepal and a
Minister of the concerned State who is responsible for
the matter of dispute and a concerned expert.
(4) The rules of procedures of the meeting of the
Inter-State Council shall be as determined by the Council
itself.
235.

Coordination between Federation, State and Local Level:
(1) The Federal Parliament shall make necessary laws in
order to maintain coordination between the Federation,
State and Local level.
(2) The State Assembly may maintain
coordination between the State and Village Bodies or
Municipalities and settle political disputes, if any, that
(152)

have arisen, in coordination with the concerned Village
Body, Municipality and the District Coordination
Committee.
(3) The processes and procedures for the
settlement of disputes under clause (2) shall be as
provided for in the State law.
236.

Inter-State trade: Notwithstanding anything contained
elsewhere in this Constitution, it is prohibited to make
any kind of obstruction to the carriage of goods or
extension of services by a State or Local level to another
State or Local level or to the carriage of goods or
extension of services to any State or Local Level or to
levy tax, fee or charge thereon or to make any kind of
discrimination on the carriage or extension of such
services or goods.

237.

Not to affect jurisdiction of Constitutional Bench of
Supreme Court: Nothing contained in this Part shall
affect the jurisdiction of the Constitutional Bench of the
Supreme Court under Article 137.

(153)

Part-21
Commission for the Investigation of Abuse of Authority
238.

Commission for the Investigation of Abuse of Authority:
(1) There shall be a Commission for the Investigation of
Abuse of Authority of Nepal, consisting of the Chief
Commissioner and four other Commissioners. The Chief
Commissioner shall act as the Chairperson of the
Commission for the Investigation of Abuse of Authority.
(2) The President shall, on recommendation of
the Constitutional Council, appoint the Chief
Commissioner and Commissioners.
(3) The term of office of the Chief Commissioner
and Commissioners shall be six years from the date of
appointment.
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in clause
(3), the office of the Chief Commissioner or a
Commissioner shall be vacant in any of the following
circumstances:
(a)

if he or she tenders resignation in
writing to the President,

(b)

if he or she attains the age of sixtyfive years,

(c)

if a motion of impeachment is
passed against him or her under
Article 101,

(d)

if he or she is removed from office
by
the
President
on
recommendation
of
the
Constitutional Council on grounds
of his or her inability to hold office
and discharge the functions due to
physical or mental illness,
(154)

(e)

if he or she dies.

(5) The Chief Commissioner and Commissioners
appointed under clause (2) shall not be eligible for
reappointment.
Provided that a Commissioner may be appointed
to the office of Chief Commissioner, and when a
Commissioner is so appointed as the Chief
Commissioner, his or her term of office shall be so
computed as to include his or her term as the
Commissioner.
(6) A person shall be eligible to be appointed as
the Chief Commissioner or a Commissioner of the
Commission for the Investigation of Abuse of Authority
if he or she possesses the following qualification:
(a)

holding a bachelor's degree from a
recognized university,

(b)

not being a member of any political
party at the time of appointment,

(c)

having gained at least twenty years of
experiences in the field of either
accounting, revenue, engineering, law,
development or research and being a
distinguished person,

(d)

having attained the age of forty five
years, and

(e)

being of high moral character.

(7) The remuneration and other conditions of
service of the Chief Commissioner and the
Commissioners shall be as provided for in the Federal
law. The remuneration and conditions of service of the
Chief Commissioner and the Commissioners shall not,

(155)

so long as they hold office, be altered to their
disadvantage.
Provided that this provision shall not apply in
cases where a state of emergency is declared because of
extreme economic disarrays.
(8) A person once appointed as the Chief
Commissioner or Commissioner shall not be eligible for
appointment in other government service.
Provided that nothing in this clause shall be
deemed to be a bar to the appointment to any political
position or to any position which has the responsibility
of making investigations, inquiries or findings on any
subject, or to any position which has the responsibility of
submitting advice, opinion or recommendation after
carrying out a study or research on any subject.
239.

Functions, duties and powers of Commission for the
Investigation of Abuse of Authority: (1) The
Commission for the Investigation of Abuse of Authority
may, in accordance with law, conduct, or cause to be
conducted, investigations of any abuse of authority
committed through corruption by any person holding
public office.
Provided that this clause shall not apply to any
official in relation to whom this Constitution itself
separately provides for such action and to any official in
relation to whom other law provides for a separate
special provision.
(2) In the case of the persons who can be
removed from office by passing a motion of
impeachment under Article 101, the Judges who can be
removed by the Judicial Council and the persons who are
liable to action under the Army Act, it may conduct, or
cause to be conducted, investigations in accordance with
(156)

the Federal law after they have been removed from
office.
(3) If the Commission for the Investigation of
Abuse of Authority finds, on investigation conducted
pursuant to clause (1) or (2), that a person holding public
office has committed an act which is defined by law as
corruption, it may file, or cause to be filed, a case against
that person and other person involved in that offense in
the competent court in accordance with law.
(4) If, on investigation conducted pursuant to
clause (1) or (2), any act or action done or taken by a
person holding public office appears to be of such nature
as to be falling under the jurisdiction of another official
or body, the Commission for the Investigation of Abuse
of Authority may write to the concerned official or body
for necessary action.
(5) The Commission for the Investigation of
Abuse of Authority may delegate any of its functions,
duties and powers on the conducting of investigations or
filing cases, to the Chief Commissioner, a Commissioner
or an officer employee of the Government of Nepal to be
exercised and complied with subject to the specified
conditions.
(6) Other functions, duties and powers and rules
of procedure of the Commission for the Investigation of
Abuse of Authority shall be as provided for in the
Federal law.

(157)

Part-22
Auditor General
240.

Auditor General: (1) There shall be an Auditor General
of Nepal.
(2) The President shall, on the recommendation
of the Constitutional Council, appoint the Auditor General.
(3) The term of office of the Auditor General
shall be six years from the date of appointment.
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in clause
(3), the office of the Auditor General shall be vacant in
any of the following circumstances:
(a)

if he or she tenders resignation in writing
to the President,

(b)

if he or she attains the age of sixty-five
years,

(c)

if a motion of impeachment is passed
against him or her under Article 101,

(d)

if he or she is removed from office by
the President on recommendation of the
Constitutional Council on grounds of his
or her inability to hold office and
discharge the functions due to physical
or mental illness,

(e)

if he or she dies.

(5) The Auditor General appointed under clause
(2) shall not be eligible for reappointment.
(6) A person shall be eligible to be appointed as
the Auditor General if he or she possesses the following
qualification:

(158)

(a)

having served in the Special Class of the
Government of Nepal or having at least
twenty years of experiences in audit
related work, after having obtained a
bachelor's degree in management,
commerce or accounting from a
recognized university or having passed a
chartered accountancy examination,

(b)

not being a member of any political
party at the time of appointment,

(c)

having attained the age of forty five
years, and

(d)

being of high moral character.

(7) The remuneration and conditions of service of
the Auditor General shall be as provided for in the
Federal law. The remuneration and conditions of service
of the Auditor General shall not, so long as he or she
holds office, be altered to his or her disadvantage.
Provided that this provision shall not apply in
cases where a state of emergency is declared because of
extreme economic disarrays.
(8) A person once appointed as the Auditor
General shall not be eligible for appointment in another
government service.
Provided that nothing in this clause shall be
deemed to be a bar to the appointment to any political
position or to any position which has the responsibility
of making investigations, inquiries or findings on any
subject, or to any position which has the responsibility of
submitting advice, opinion or recommendation after
carrying out a study or research on any subject.

(159)

241.

Functions, duties and powers of Auditor-General: (1)
The accounts of all Federal and State Government
Offices including the Office of the President, Office of
the Vice-President, Supreme Court, Federal Parliament,
State Assembly, State Government, Local level,
Constitutional Bodies and Offices thereof, Courts, Office
of the Attorney General, Nepal Army, Nepal Police and
Armed Police Force, Nepal shall be audited by the
Auditor-General in accordance with law, having regard
to, inter alia, the regularity, economy, efficiency,
effectiveness and the propriety thereof.
(2) The Auditor General shall be consulted in the
matter of appointment of an auditor to carry out the audit
of a corporate body of which the Government of Nepal
or State Government owns more than fifty percent of the
shares or assets. The Auditor General may also issue
necessary directives setting forth the principles for
carrying out the audit of such corporate body.
(3) The Auditor General shall, at all times, have
power to examine any books of accounts for the purpose
of carrying out the functions under clause (1). It shall be
the duty of the concerned chief of office to provide all
such documents and information as may be demanded by
the Auditor General or any of his or her employees.
(4) The accounts to be audited pursuant to clause
(1) shall be maintained in the form prescribed by the
Auditor General, as provided for in the Federal law.
(5) In addition to the accounts of the offices
mentioned in clause (1), the Federal law may also
require the accounts of any other offices or bodies to be
audited by the Auditor General.

(160)

Part-23
Public Service Commission
242.

Public Service Commission: (1) There shall be a Public
Service Commission of Nepal, consisting of the
Chairperson and four other Members.
(2) The President shall, on the recommendation
of the Constitutional Council, appoint the Chairperson
and Members.
(3) At least fifty percent of the total number of
Members of the Public Service Commission shall be
appointed from amongst the persons who have worked
for twenty or more in any government service, and the
rest of the Members shall be appointed from amongst the
persons who hold reputation after having done research,
investigation, teaching or any other significant work in
the field of science, technology, art, literature, law,
public administration, sociology or other sphere of
national life.
(4) The term of office of the Chairperson and
Members of the Public Service Commission shall be six
years from the date of appointment.
(5) The Chairperson and Members appointed
under clause (2) shall not be eligible for reappointment.
Provided that a Member may be appointed to the
office of Chairperson, and when a Member is so
appointed as the Chairperson, his or her term of office
shall be so computed as to include his or her term as the
Member.
(6) Notwithstanding anything contained in clause
(4), the office of the Chairperson or a Member of the
Public Service Commission shall be vacant in any of the
following circumstances:
(161)

(a)

if he or she tenders resignation in writing
to the President,

(b)

if he or she attains the age of sixty-five
years,

(c)

if a motion of impeachment is passed
against him or her under Article 101,

(d)

if he or she is removed from office by
the President on recommendation of the
Constitutional Council on grounds of his
or her inability to hold office and
discharge the functions due to physical
or mental illness,

(e)

if he or she dies.

(7) A person shall be eligible to be appointed as
the Chairperson or a member of the Public Service
Commission if he or she possesses the following
qualification:
(a)

holding a master's degree from a
recognized university,

(b)

not being a member of any political
party at the time of appointment,

(c)

having attained the age of forty five
years, and

(d)

being of high moral character.

(8) The remuneration and other conditions of
service of the Chairperson and the members of the Public
Service Commission shall be as provided for in the
Federal law. The remuneration and conditions of service
of the Chairperson and the Members of the Public
Service Commission shall not, so long as they hold
office, be altered to their disadvantage.
(162)

Provided that this provision shall not apply in
cases where a state of emergency is declared because of
extreme economic disarrays.
(9) A person once appointed as the Chairperson
and the members of the Public Service Commission shall
not be eligible for appointment in other government
service.
Provided that nothing in this clause shall be
deemed to be a bar to the appointment to any political
position or to any position which has the responsibility
of making investigations, inquiries or findings on any
subject, or to any position which has the responsibility of
submitting advice, opinion or recommendation after
carrying out a study or research on any subject.
243.

Functions, duties and powers of Public Service
Commission: (1) It shall be the duty of the Public
Service Commission to conduct examinations for the
selection of suitable candidates to be appointed to the
positions in the Civil Service.
Explanation: For the purposes of this Article,
"positions in the Civil Service" means all positions in the
services of the Government of Nepal, other than the
positions in the services of Army personnel, Nepal
Police or Armed Police Force, Nepal and such other
positions in the services as are excluded by an Act from
the Civil Service.
(2) The Public Service Commission shall conduct
written examinations to be given for appointment to the
offices of the Nepal Army, Nepal Police, Armed Police
Force, Nepal, other Federal governmental services and of
bodies corporate, other than the positions in the Civil
Service.

(163)

Explanation: For the purposes of this Article, "body
corporate" means a corporation, company, bank or board
of which more than fifty percent or more of the shares or
assets is owned or controlled by the Government of
Nepal, except a university or Education Service
Commission, or a commission, corporation, authority,
body, academy, board, centre, council and other body
corporate of similar nature established under the Federal
law or formed by the Government of Nepal.
(3) The Public Service Commission shall be
consulted on the general principles to be followed in the
course of making appointment and promotion to any
position of the Nepal army, Nepal Police, Armed Police
Force, Nepal and other Federal government services.
(4) The Public Service Commission shall be
consulted on the laws relating to the conditions of
service of the employees in the service of a body
corporate and on the general principles to be followed in
the course of making promotion to any position of such
service and taking departmental action against any such
employee.
(5) No permanent appointment to any
pensionable position chargeable on the Government of
Nepal shall be made except in consultation with the
Public Service Commission.
(6) The Public Service Commission shall be
consulted on the following subjects:
(a)

matters concerning the law relating to
the conditions of service of the Federal
Civil Service;

(b)

the principles to be followed in making
appointments to, promotions to, the

(164)

Federal Civil Service or positions
thereof and taking departmental action;
(c)

matters concerning the suitability of
any candidate for appointment to the
Federal Civil Service position for a
period of more than six months;

(d)

matters concerning the suitability of
any candidate for transfer or promotion
from a position in one type of Federal
Civil Service to a position in other type
of Federal Civil Service or transfer or
promotion from other government
service to the Federal Civil Service or
for a change in service or transfer from
a position in a State Civil Service to a
position in the Federal Civil Service or
from a position in the Federal Civil
Service to a State Civil Service,

(e)

matters concerning the permanent
transfer or promotion of an employee
working in any position which does not
require consultation with the Public
Service Commission to any position
which requires consultation with the
Public Service Commission; and

(f)

matters relating to departmental action
against any employee of the Federal
Civil Service.

(7) Notwithstanding anything contained in clause
(6), matters falling within the jurisdiction of the Judicial
Service Commission under Article 154 shall be governed
by that Article.

(165)

(8) The Public Service Commission may so
delegate any of its functions, duties and powers to its
Chairperson or Member, an employee of the Government
of Nepal as to be exercised and complied with subject to
the specified conditions.
(9) Other functions, duties and powers and rules
of procedure of the Public Service Commission shall be
as provided for in the Federal law.
244.

Provisions relating to State Public Service Commission:
(1) Each State shall have a State Public Service
Commission.
(2) The functions, duties and powers of the State
Public Service Commission shall be as provided for in
the State law.
(3) The Federal Parliament shall by law
determine grounds and standards for the purposes of
clause (2).

(166)

Part-24
Election Commission
245.

Election Commission: (1) There shall be an Election
Commission of Nepal, consisting of a Chief
Commissioner and four other Commissioners. The Chief
Commissioner shall act as the chairperson of the
Election Commission.
(2) The President shall, on the recommendation
of the Constitutional Council, appoint the Chief Election
Commissioner and Commissioners.
(3) The term of office of the Chief Election
Commissioner and Commissioners of the Election
Commission shall be six years from the date of
appointment.
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in clause
(3), the office of the Chief Election Commissioner or
Election Commissioner shall be vacant in any of the
following circumstances:
(a)

if he or she tenders resignation in writing
to the President,

(b)

if he or she attains the age of sixty-five
years,

(c)

if a motion of impeachment is passed
against him or her under Article 101,

(d)

if he or she is removed from office by
the President on recommendation of the
Constitutional Council on grounds of his
or her inability to hold office and
discharge the functions due to physical
or mental illness,

(e)

if he or she dies.
(167)

(5) The Chief Election Commissioner and
Commissioners appointed under clause (2) shall not be
eligible for reappointment.
Provided that a Commissioner may be appointed
to the office of Chief Election Commissioner, and when
a Commissioner is so appointed as the Chief Election
Commissioner, his or her term of office shall be so
computed as to include his or her term as the
Commissioner.
(6) A person shall be eligible to be appointed as
the Chief Election Commissioner or an Election
Commissioner if he or she possesses the following
qualification:
(a)

holding a bachelor's degree from a
recognized university,

(b)

not being a member of any political
party at the time of appointment,

(c)

having attained the age of forty five
years, and

(d)

being of high moral character.

(7) The remuneration and other conditions of
service of the Chief Election Commissioner and Election
Commissioners shall be as provided for in the Federal
law. The remuneration and conditions of service of the
Chief Election Commissioner and the Commissioners
shall not, so long as they hold office, be altered to their
disadvantage.
Provided that this provision shall not apply in
cases where a state of emergency is declared because of
extreme economic disarrays.
(8) A person once appointed as the Chief
Election Commissioner and a Commissioner of the
(168)

Election Commission shall not be
appointment in other government service.

eligible

for

Provided that nothing in this clause shall be
deemed to be a bar to the appointment to any political
position or to any position which has the responsibility
of making investigations, inquiries or findings on any
subject, or to any position which has the responsibility of
submitting advice, opinion or recommendation after
carrying out a study or research on any subject.
246.

Functions, duties and powers of the Election
Commission: (1) The Election Commission shall,
subject to this Constitution and the Federal law, conduct,
supervise, direct and control the election to the President,
Vice-President, members of the Federal Parliament,
members of State Assemblies and members of Local
level. For these purposes, the Election Commission shall
prepare electoral rolls.
(2) The Election Commission shall hold a
referendum on a matter of national importance pursuant
to this Constitution and the Federal law
(3) If, after nomination of candidacy for the
President, Vice-President, member of the Federal
Parliament, member of State Assemblies or member of
Local level has been filed but before the election results
are declared, a question arises about the qualification of
a candidate, the Election Commission shall decide that
question.
(4) The Election Commission may so delegate
any of its functions, duties and powers to the Chief
Election Commissioner, Election Commissioner or any
government employee as to be exercised and complied
with subject to the specified conditions.

(169)

(5) Other functions, duties and powers and rules
of procedure of the Election Commission shall be as
provided for in the Federal law.
247.

To provide necessary assistance to Election Commission:
The Government of Nepal, State Government and Local
Government shall provide such employees and other
assistance to the Election Commission as may be
required to perform its functions pursuant to this
Constitution.

(170)

Part-25
National Human Rights Commission
248.

National Human Rights Commission: (1) There shall be
a National Human Rights Commission of Nepal,
consisting of a Chairperson and four other members.
(2) The President shall, on the recommendation
of the Constitutional Council, appoint the Chairperson
and members.
(3) The term of office of the Chairperson and
members of the National Human Rights Commission
shall be six years from the date of appointment.
(4) The Chairperson and members appointed
under clause (2) shall not be eligible for reappointment.
Provided that a Member may be appointed to the
office of Chairperson, and when a member is so
appointed as the Chairperson, his or her term of office
shall be so computed as to include his or her term as the
Member.
(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in clause
(3), the office of the Chairperson or member of the
National Human Rights Commission shall be vacant in
any of the following circumstances:
(a)

if he or she tenders resignation in writing
to the President,

(b)

if a motion of impeachment is passed
against him or her under Article 101,

(c)

if he or she is removed from office by
the President on recommendation of the
Constitutional Council on grounds of his
or her inability to hold office and
discharge the functions due to physical
or mental illness,
(171)

(d)

if he or she dies.

(6) A person shall be eligible to be appointed as
the Chairperson or a member of the National Human
Rights Commission if he or she possesses the following
qualification:
(a)

in the case of the Chairperson, being a
retired Chief Justice or retired Judge of
the Supreme Court and having
rendered outstanding contribution to
the protection and promotion of human
rights or being a renowned person
having been active for at least twenty
years in and rendered outstanding
contribution to the protection and
promotion of human rights or to
various fields of national life,

(b)

in the case of a Member, being a
person being involved in the field of
the protection and promotion of human
rights or rights and interests of the
child or being a renowned person
having been active for at least twenty
years in and rendered outstanding
contribution to various fields of
national life,

(c)

holding a bachelor's degree from a
recognized university,

(d)

having attained the age of forty five
years,

(e)

not being a member of any political
party at the time of appointment,

(f)

being of high moral character.

(172)

(7) The remuneration and other conditions of
service of the Chairperson and members of the National
Human Rights Commission shall be as provided for in
the Federal law. The remuneration and conditions of
service of the Chairperson and members of the National
Human Rights Commission shall not, so long as they
hold office, be altered to their disadvantage.
Provided that this provision shall not apply in
cases where a state of emergency is declared because of
extreme economic disarrays.
(8) A person once appointed as the Chairperson
or a member of the National Human Rights Commission
shall not be eligible for appointment in other government
service.
Provided that nothing in this clause shall be
deemed to be a bar to the appointment to any political
position or to any position which has the responsibility
of making investigations, inquiries or findings on any
subject, or to any position which has the responsibility of
submitting advice, opinion or recommendation after
carrying out a study or research on any subject.
249.

Functions, duties and powers of National Human Rights
Commission: (1) It shall be the duty of the National
Human Rights Commission to respect, protect and
promote human rights and ensure effective enforcement
thereof.
(2) For the accomplishment of the duty
mentioned in clause (1), the National Human Rights
Commission shall perform the following functions:
(a)

to inquire, on its own initiative or on
petition or complaint presented in or sent
to the Commission by a victim or any
person on his or her behalf or on
(173)

information received by the Commission
from any source, into and investigate
complaints of violations of human rights
of an individual or group or abetment
thereof, and make recommendation for
action against the perpetrators,
(b)

if any official who has the responsibility
or duty to prevent violations of human
rights fails to fulfill or perform his or her
responsibility or duty or shows
reluctance in the fulfillment or
performance of his or her responsibility
or duty, to make recommendation to the
concerned authority to take departmental
action against such official,

(c)

if it is required to institute a case against
any person or organization who has
violated human rights, to make
recommendation to file a case in the
court in accordance with law;

(d)

to coordinate and collaborate with the
civil society in order to enhance
awareness on human rights,

(e)

to make recommendation, accompanied
by the reasons and grounds, to the
concerned body for taking departmental
action against and imposing punishment
on those who have violated human
rights,

(f)

to carry out periodic reviews of the
relevant laws relating to human rights
and make recommendation to the
Government of Nepal for necessary

(174)

improvements in and amendments to
such laws,
(g)

if Nepal has to become a party to any
international treaty or agreement on
human rights, to make recommendation,
accompanied by the reasons therefor, to
the Government of Nepal; and monitor
whether any such treaty or agreement to
which Nepal is already a party has been
implemented, and if it is found not to
have been implemented, to make
recommendation to the Government of
Nepal for its implementation,

(h)

to publish, in accordance with law, the
names of the officials, persons or bodies
who have failed to observe or implement
any recommendations or directives made
or given by the National Human Rights
Commission in relation to the violations
of human rights, and record them as
violators of human rights.

(3) In discharging its functions or performing its
duties, the National Human Rights Commission may
exercise the following powers:
(a)

to exercise all such powers as of a court
in respect of the summoning and
enforcing the attendance of any person
before the Commission and seeking and
recording his or her information or
statements or depositions, examining
evidence and producing exhibits and
proofs,

(b)

on receipt of information by the
Commission in any manner that a
(175)

serious violation of human rights has
already been committed or is going to be
committed, to search any person or his
or her residence or office, enter such
residence or office without notice, and,
in the course of making such search, take
possession of any document, evidence or
proof related with the violation of human
rights,
(c)

in the event of necessity to take action
immediately on receipt of information
that the human rights of any person are
being violated, to enter any government
office or any other place without notice
and rescue such person,

(d)

to order for the provision of
compensation in accordance with law to
any person who is a victim of the
violations of human rights;

(4) The National Human Rights Commission
may so delegate any of its functions, duties and powers
to the Chairperson of the Commission, any of its
Members or a government employee as to be exercised
and complied with subject to the specified conditions.
(5) Other functions, duties and powers and rules
of procedure of the National Human Rights Commission
shall be as provided for in the Federal law.
Part-26
National Natural Resources and Fiscal Commission
250.

National Natural Resources and Fiscal Commission: (1)
There shall be a National Natural Resources and Fiscal
Commission of Nepal, consisting of a maximum of five
members including a Chairperson.
(176)

(2) The President shall, on the recommendation
of the Constitutional Council, appoint the Chairperson
and members of the National Natural Resources and
Fiscal Commission.
(3) The term of office of the Chairperson and
members of the National Natural Resources and Fiscal
Commission shall be six years from the date of
appointment.
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in clause
(3), the office of the Chairperson or member of the
National Natural Resources and Fiscal Commission shall
be vacant in any of the following circumstances:
(a)

if he or she tenders resignation in writing
to the President,

(b)

if he or she attains the age of sixty-five
years,

(c)

if a motion of impeachment is passed
against him or her under Article 101,

(d)

if he or she is removed from office by
the President on recommendation of the
Constitutional Council on grounds of his
or her inability to hold office and
discharge the functions due to physical
or mental illness,

(e)

if he or she dies.

(5) The Chairperson and members appointed
under clause (2) shall not be eligible for reappointment.
Provided that a member may be appointed
office of Chairperson, and when a member
appointed as the Chairperson, his or her term of
shall be so computed as to include his or her term
member.
(177)

to the
is so
office
as the

(6) A person shall be eligible to be appointed as
the Chairperson or a member of the National Natural
Resources and Fiscal Commission if he or she possesses
the following qualification:
(a)

having gained expertise upon being
active for at least twenty years in the
field of natural resources or fiscal
management,
economics,
law,
management, after holding a bachelor's
degree in the relevant subject from a
recognized university,

(b)

not being a member of any political
party at the time of appointment,

(c)

having attained the age of forty five
years,

(d)

being of high moral character.

(7) The remuneration and other conditions of
service of the Chairperson and members of the National
Natural Resources and Fiscal Commission shall be as
provided for in the Federal law, and their remuneration
and conditions of service shall not, so long as they hold
office, be altered to their disadvantage.
Provided that this provision shall not apply in
cases where a state of emergency is declared because of
extreme economic disarrays.
(8) A person once appointed as the Chairperson
or a member of the National Natural Resources and
Fiscal Commission shall not be eligible for appointment
in other government service.
Provided that nothing in this clause shall be
deemed to be a bar to the appointment to any political
position or to any position which has the responsibility
(178)

of making investigations, inquiries or findings on any
subject, or to any position which has the responsibility of
submitting advice, opinion or recommendation after
carrying out a study or research on any subject.
251.

Functions, duties and powers of National Natural
Resources and Fiscal Commission: (1) The functions,
duties and powers of the National Natural Resources and
Fiscal Commission shall be as follows:
(a)

to determine detailed basis and modality
for the distribution of revenues between
the Federal, State and Local Governments
out of the Federal Consolidated Fund in
accordance with the Constitution and law,

(b)

to
make
recommendation
about
equalization grants to be provided to the
State and Local Governments out of the
Federal Consolidated Fund,

(c)

to conduct study and research work and
prepare parameters as to conditional
grants to be provided to the State and
Local Governments in accordance with
national
policies
and
programs,
norms/standards
and
situation
of
infrastructures,

(d)

to determine detailed basis and modality
for the distribution of revenues between
the State and Local Governments out of
the State Consolidated Fund,

(e)

to recommend measures to meet
expenditures of the Federal, State and
Local Governments, and to reform
revenue collection,

(179)

(f)

to analyze macro-economic indicators and
recommend ceiling of internal loans that
the Federal, State and Local Governments
can borrow,

(g)

to review the bases for the distribution
between the Federal and
State
Governments of revenues and recommend
for revision,

(h)

to set bases for the determination of
shares of the Government of Nepal, State
Government and Local level in
investments and returns, in the
mobilization of natural resources,

(i)

to do study and research work on possible
disputes that may arise between the
Federation and the States, between States,
between a State and a Local level, and
between Local levels, and make
suggestions to act in a coordinated
manner for the prevention of such
disputes.

(2) The National Natural Resources and Fiscal
Commission shall carry out necessary study and research
work about environmental impact assessment required in
the course of distribution of natural resources, and make
recommendations to the Government of Nepal.
(3) Other functions, duties and powers and rules
of procedure of the National Natural Resources and
Fiscal Commission, detailed bases required to be
followed in the mobilization of natural resources or
distribution of revenues, and other matters including
conditions of service of the officials of the Commission
shall be as provided for in the Federal law.

(180)

Part-27
Other Commissions
252.

National Women Commission: (1) There shall be a
National Women Commission of Nepal, consisting of a
Chairperson and four other members.
(2) The President shall, on the recommendation
of the Constitutional Council, appoint the Chairperson
and members of the National Women Commission.
(3) The term of office of the Chairperson and
members of the National Women Commission shall be
six years from the date of appointment.
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in clause
(3), the office of the Chairperson or member of the
National Women Commission shall be vacant in any of
the following circumstances:
(a)

if he or she tenders resignation in writing
to the President,

(b)

if he or she attains the age of sixty-five
years,

(c)

if a motion of impeachment is passed
against him or her under Article 101,

(d)

if he or she is removed from office by
the President on recommendation of the
Constitutional Council on grounds of his
or her inability to hold office and
discharge the functions due to physical
or mental illness,

(e)

if he or she dies.

(5) The Chairperson and members appointed
under clause (2) shall not be eligible for reappointment.

(181)

Provided that a member may be appointed
office of Chairperson, and when a member
appointed as the Chairperson, his or her term of
shall be so computed as to include his or her term
member.

to the
is so
office
as the

(6) A person shall be eligible to be appointed as
the Chairperson or a member of the National Women
Commission if he or she possesses the following
qualification:
(a)

being a woman having rendered
outstanding contribution, for at least ten
years, to the field of rights and interests
of women or gender justice or women
development or human rights and law,

(b)

in the case of the Chairperson, holding a
bachelor's degree from a recognized
university,

(c)

having attained the age of forty five
years,

(d)

not being a member of any political
party at the time of appointment, and

(e)

being of high moral character.

(7) The remuneration and conditions of service of
the Chairperson and members of the National Women
Commission shall be as provided for in the Federal law,
and their remuneration and conditions of service shall
not, so long as they hold office, be altered to their
disadvantage.
Provided that this provision shall not apply in
cases where a state of emergency is declared because of
extreme economic disarrays.

(182)

(8) A person once appointed as the Chairperson or
a member of the National Women Commission shall not
be eligible for appointment in other government service.
Provided that nothing in this clause shall be
deemed to be a bar to the appointment to any political
position or to any position which has the responsibility
of making investigations, inquiries or findings on any
subject, or to any position which has the responsibility of
submitting advice, opinion or recommendation after
carrying out a study or research on any subject.
253.

Functions, duties and powers of National Women
Commission: (1) The functions, duties and powers of the
National Women Commission shall be as follows:
(a)

to formulate policies and programs
concerning the rights and interests of the
women and submit them to the Government
of Nepal for implementation.

(b)

to monitor as to whether laws concerning the
rights and interests of the women and
obligations under the international treaties to
which Nepal is a party have been
implemented,
and
make suggestions,
accompanied by the measures for their
effective compliance and implementation to
the Government of Nepal,

(c)

in order to have the women included in the
mainstream of national development and
ensure proportional participation in all organs
of the State, to assess, monitor and evaluate
the existing policies and programs, and make
recommendation to the Government of Nepal
for their effective implementation,

(183)

(d)

to carry out study and research work on the
legal provisions relating to gender equality,
empowerment of women and women, make
recommendations to the concerned bodies on
reforms to be made on such laws, and
monitor the same.

(e)

to make suggestions to the Government of
Nepal about the preparation of reports to be
submitted by Nepal in accordance with the
provisions contained in the international
treaties or agreements concerning women's
rights, to which Nepal is a party,

(f)

if it is necessary to file cases against any
persons or bodies on matters of violence
against women or being subjected to social
ill-practices or infringement of or deprivation
of enjoyment of women's rights, to make
recommendations to the concerned bodies to
file such cases in courts in accordance with
the law.

(2) The National Women Commission may so
delegate any of its functions, duties and powers to the
Chairperson of the Commission, any of its members or
any employee of the Government of Nepal as to be
exercised and complied with subject to the specified
conditions.
(3) Other functions, duties and powers and other
relevant matters of the National Women Commission
shall be as provided for in the Federal law.
254.

Powers to establish offices in States: The National
Women Rights Commission may, as required, establish
its offices in States.

(184)

255.

National Dalit Commission: (1) There shall be a National
Dalit Commission of Nepal, consisting of a Chairperson
and four other members.
(2) The President shall, on the recommendation
of the Constitutional Council, appoint the Chairperson
and members of the National Dalit Commission.
(3) The term of office of the Chairperson and
members of the National Dalit Commission shall be six
years from the date of appointment.
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in clause
(3), the office of the Chairperson or member of the
National Dalit Commission shall be vacant in any of the
following circumstances:
(a)

if he or she tenders resignation in writing
to the President,

(b)

if he or she attains the age of sixty-five
years,

(c)

if a motion of impeachment is passed
against him or her under Article 101,

(d)

if he or she is removed from office by
the President on recommendation of the
Constitutional Council on grounds of his
or her inability to hold office and
discharge the functions due to physical
or mental illness,

(e)

if he or she dies.

(5) The Chairperson and members appointed
under clause (2) shall not be eligible for reappointment.
Provided that a member may be appointed to the
office of Chairperson, and when a member is so
appointed as the Chairperson, his or her term of office
(185)

shall be so computed as to include his or her term as the
member.
(6) A person shall be eligible to be appointed as
the Chairperson or a member of the National Dalit
Commission if he or she possesses the following
qualification:
(a)

being a person having rendered
outstanding contribution to the field of
rights and interests of the Dalit
community or human rights and law, for
at least ten years,

(b)

in the case of the Chairperson, holding at
least a bachelor's degree from a
recognized university,

(c)

having attained the age of forty five
years,

(d)

not being a member of any political
party at the time of appointment, and

(e)

being of high moral character.

(7) The remuneration and conditions of service of
the Chairperson and members of the National Dalit
Commission shall be as provided for in the Federal law,
and their remuneration and conditions of service shall
not, so long as they hold office, be altered to their
disadvantage.
Provided that this provision shall not apply in
cases where a state of emergency is declared because of
extreme economic disarrays.
(8) A person once appointed as the Chairperson
or a member of the National Dalit Commission shall not
be eligible for appointment in other government service.

(186)

Provided that nothing in this clause shall be
deemed to be a bar to the appointment to any political
position or to any position which has the responsibility
of making investigations, inquiries or findings on any
subject, or to any position which has the responsibility of
submitting advice, opinion or recommendation after
carrying out a study or research on any subject.
256.

Functions, duties and powers of National Dalit
Commission: (1) The functions, duties and powers of the
National Dalit Commission shall be as follows:
(a)

to conduct study and exploration as to the
overall situation of the Dalit community,
identify areas of necessary policy, legal and
institutional reforms in that field, and make
recommendations to the Government of
Nepal,

(b)

to formulate national policies and programs
concerning the interests of the Dalit for the
upliftment and development of the Dalit,
putting an end to caste-based discrimination,
oppression and discrimination, and submit
such policies and programs to the
Government
of
Nepal
for
their
implementation,

(c)

to monitor as to whether laws concerning the
interests of the Dalit, including the special
provisions made for the upliftment and
interests of the Dalit community have been
effectively implemented, and in the event of
absence of observance or implementation, to
make suggestions to the Government of
Nepal for the observance or implementation
thereof,

(187)

(d)

to make suggestions to the Government of
Nepal about the preparation of reports to be
submitted by Nepal in accordance with the
provisions contained in the international
treaties or agreements concerning the rights
of the Dalit community, to which Nepal is a
party,

(e)

in order to have the Dalit community
included in the mainstream of national
development and ensure proportional
participation in all organs of the State, to
assess, monitor and evaluate the existing
policies
and
programs,
and
make
recommendation to the Government of Nepal
for their effective implementation,

(f)

if it is necessary to file cases against any
persons or bodies on matters of being victims
of
caste-based
discrimination
and
untouchability or social ill-practices or
infringement of or deprivation of enjoyment
of the rights of the Dalit, to make
recommendations to the concerned bodies to
file such cases in courts in accordance with
the law.

(2) The National Dalit Commission may so
delegate any of its functions, duties and powers to the
Chairperson of the Commission, any of its members or
any employee of the Government of Nepal as to be
exercised and complied with subject to the specified
conditions.
(3) Other functions, duties and powers and other
relevant matters of the National Dalit Commission shall
be as provided for in the Federal law.

(188)

257.

Powers to establish offices in States: The National Dalit
Commission may, as required, establish its offices in
States.

258.

National Inclusion Commission: (1) There shall be a
National Inclusion Commission of Nepal, consisting of a
Chairperson and four other members.
(2) The President shall, on the recommendation
of the Constitutional Council, appoint the Chairperson
and members of the National Inclusion Commission.
(3) The term of office of the Chairperson and
members of the National Inclusion Commission shall be
six years from the date of appointment.
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in clause
(3), the office of the Chairperson or member of the
National Inclusion Commission shall be vacant in any of
the following circumstances:
(a)

if he or she tenders resignation in writing
to the President,

(b)

if he or she attains the age of sixty-five
years,

(c)

if a motion of impeachment is passed
against him or her under Article 101,

(d)

if he or she is removed from office by
the President on recommendation of the
Constitutional Council on grounds of his
or her inability to hold office and
discharge the functions due to physical
or mental illness,

(e)

if he or she dies.

(5) The Chairperson and members appointed
under clause (2) shall not be eligible for reappointment.
(189)

Provided that a member may be appointed
office of Chairperson, and when a member
appointed as the Chairperson, his or her term of
shall be so computed as to include his or her term
member.

to the
is so
office
as the

(6) A person shall be eligible to be appointed as
the Chairperson or a member of the National Inclusion
Commission if he or she possesses the following
qualification:
(a)

being a person having rendered
outstanding contribution, for at least ten
years, to the field of social inclusion,
rights and interests or development of
persons with disabilities, minority and
marginalized communities and backward
areas and classes or human rights,

(b)

in the case of the Chairperson, holding a
bachelor's degree from a recognized
university,

(c)

having attained the age of forty five
years,

(d)

not being a member of any political
party at the time of appointment, and

(e)

being of high moral character.

(7) The remuneration and conditions of service of
the Chairperson and members of the National Inclusion
Commission shall be as provided for in the Federal law,
and their remuneration and conditions of service shall
not, so long as they hold office, be altered to their
disadvantage.

(190)

Provided that this provision shall not apply in
cases where a state of emergency is declared because of
extreme economic disarrays.
(8) A person once appointed as the Chairperson
or a member of the National Inclusion Commission shall
not be eligible for appointment in other government
service.
Provided that nothing in this clause shall be
deemed to be a bar to the appointment to any political
position or to any position which has the responsibility
of making investigations, inquiries or findings on any
subject, or to any position which has the responsibility of
submitting advice, opinion or recommendation after
carrying out a study or research on any subject.
259.

Functions, duties and powers of National Inclusion
Commission: (1) The functions, duties and powers of the
National Inclusion Commission shall be as follows:
(a)

to conduct study and research works for
the protection of the rights and interests
of the communities, including Khas
Arya, Pichhada class, persons with
disabilities, senior citizens, labours,
peasants, minorities and marginalized
community, backward class, people of
Karnali and the indigent class,

(b)

to study the status of implementation of
the policies and laws adopted by the
Government of Nepal for the inclusion
of the community, class and region
mentioned in sub-clause (a) and make
suggestions to the Government for
reforms,

(191)

(c)

to study as to whether there has been
appropriate representation of the
community, class and region mentioned
in sub-clause (a) in the organs of the State
and make suggestions to the Government
of Nepal to review the special provisions
made for the representation of such
community, class and region,

(d)

to study as to whether the protection,
empowerment and development of the
community, class and region mentioned
in sub-clause (a) has been satisfactory
and make recommendations to the
Government of Nepal about policies to
be pursued in the future,

(e)

to make suggestions to the Government
of Nepal about policies and programs to
be pursued for the development and
prosperity of the Karnali and backward
regions,

(f)

to make recommendations for timely
revisions of laws concerning minority
and marginalized communities,

(g)

to monitor the status of implementation
of rights and interests guaranteed for
minority and marginalized communities
and make recommendations for revision
upon necessary review on the basis of
periodic national census and human
development index.

(2) The National Inclusion Commission may so
delegate any of its functions, duties and powers to the
Chairperson of the Commission, any of its members or
any employee of the Government of Nepal as to be
(192)

exercised and complied with subject to the specified
conditions.
(3) Other functions, duties and powers and other
relevant matters of the National Inclusion Commission
shall be as provided for in the Federal law.
260.

Powers to establish offices in States: The National
Inclusion Rights Commission may, as required, establish
its offices in States.

261.

Indigenous Nationalities Commission: (1) There shall be
an Indigenous Nationalities Commission of Nepal,
consisting of a Chairperson and a maximum of four other
members.
(2) The President shall, on the recommendation of
the Constitutional Council, appoint the Chairperson and
members of the Indigenous Nationalities Commission.
(3) The term of office of the Chairperson and
members of the Indigenous Nationalities Commission
shall be six years from the date of appointment.
(4) Other matters relating to the qualification for
the Chairperson and members of the Indigenous
Nationalities Commission, circumstances in which their
offices fall vacant, their remuneration and conditions of
service and the functions, duties and powers of this
Commission shall be as provided for in the Federal law.

262.

Madhesi Commission: (1) There shall be a Madhesi
Commission of Nepal, consisting of a Chairperson and a
maximum of four other members.
(2) The President shall, on the recommendation
of the Constitutional Council, appoint the Chairperson
and members of the Madhesi Commission.

(193)

(3) The term of office of the Chairperson and
members of the Madhesi Commission shall be six years
from the date of appointment.
(4) Other matters relating to the qualification for
the Chairperson and members of the Madhesi
Commission, circumstances in which their offices fall
vacant, their remuneration and conditions of service and
the functions, duties and powers of this Commission
shall be as provided for in the Federal law.
263.

Tharu Commission: (1) There shall be a Tharu
Commission of Nepal, consisting of a Chairperson and a
maximum of four other members.
(2) The President shall, on the recommendation
of the Constitutional Council, appoint the Chairperson
and members of the Tharu Commission.
(3) The term of office of the Chairperson and
members of the Tharu Commission shall be six years
from the date of appointment.
(4) Other matters relating to the qualification for
the Chairperson and members of the Tharu Commission,
circumstances in which their offices fall vacant, their
remuneration and conditions of service and the
functions, duties and powers of this Commission shall be
as provided for in the Federal law.

264.

Muslim Commission: (1) There shall be a Muslim
Commission of Nepal, consisting of a Chairperson and a
maximum of four other members.
(2) The President shall, on the recommendation
of the Constitutional Council, appoint the Chairperson
and members of the Muslim Commission.

(194)

(3) The term of office of the Chairperson and
members of the Muslim Commission shall be six years
from the date of appointment.
(4) Other matters relating to the qualification for
the Chairperson and members of the Muslim
Commission, circumstances in which their offices fall
vacant, their remuneration and conditions of service and
the functions, duties and powers of this Commission
shall be as provided for in the Federal law.
265.

Review of Commissions: The Federal Parliament shall,
after ten years of the commencement of this
Constitution, review the Commissions formed under this
Part.

(195)

Part-28
Provisions Relating to National Security
266.

National Security Council: (1) There shall be a National
Security Council for making recommendation to the
Government of Nepal, Council of Ministers for the
formulation of a policy on overall national interest,
security and defence of Nepal, and for the mobilization
and control of the Nepal Army, which shall consist of the
following as the Chairperson and members:
(a)

The Prime Minister

(b)

Minister for Defence,
Government of Nepal

- Member

Minister
for
Home,
Government of Nepal

- Member

(c)

- Chairperson

(d)

Minister
for Foreign
Affairs, Government of
Nepal -Member

(e)

Minister for Finance,
Government of Nepal

- Member

Chief
Secretary
Government of Nepal

- Member

(f)
(g)

Commander-in-Chief,
Nepal Army

of

- Member

(2) The secretary at the Ministry of Defence shall
act as the member secretary of the National Security
Council.
(3) The National Security Council shall submit its
annual report to the President, and the President shall
cause the report to be laid through the Prime Minister
before the Federal Parliament.

(196)

(4) Other matters relating to the National Security
Council shall be as provided by the Federal law.
267.

Provisions relating to Nepal Army: (1) There shall be an
organization of the Nepal Army in Nepal, which is
inclusive and committed to this Constitution, for the
safeguarding of independence, sovereignty, territorial
integrity and national unity of Nepal.
(2) The President shall be
commander-in-chief of the Nepal Army.

the

supreme

(3) Entry of women, Dalit, indigenous people,
indigenous nationalities, Khas Arya, Madhesi, Tharu,
Pichhada class and backward region citizens into the
Nepal Army shall, on the basis of principles of equality
and inclusion, be ensured by the Federal law.
(4) The Government of Nepal may also mobilize
the Nepal Army in other works including development,
construction and disaster management works, as
provided for in the Federal law.
(5) The President shall, on recommendation of
the Council of Ministers, appoint the Commander-inChief and remove him or her from office.
(6) The President shall, on recommendation of
the National Security Council and pursuant to a decision
of the Government of Nepal, Council of Ministers,
declare the mobilization of the Nepal Army in cases
where a grave emergency arises in regard to the
sovereignty or territorial integrity of Nepal or the
security of any part thereof, by war, external aggression,
armed rebellion or extreme economic disarray. A
declaration of the mobilization of the Nepal Army must
be ratified by the House of Representatives within one
month after the date of such declaration.

(197)

(7) Other matters pertaining to the Nepal Army
shall be in accordance with law.
268.

Provisions Relating to Nepal Police, Armed Police
Force, Nepal and National Investigation Department: (1)
The Federation shall have Nepal Police, Armed Police
Force, Nepal and National Investigation Department.
(2) Each State shall have a State police
organization.
(3) Matters relating to the operation, supervision
and coordination of functions to be discharged by the
Nepal Police and the State police shall be as provided for
in the Federal law.
(4) Other matters relating to the Nepal Police,
Armed Police Force, Nepal and National Investigation
Department shall be as provided by the Federal law.

(198)

Part-29
Provisions Relating to Political Parties
269.

Formation, registration and operation of political parties:
(1) Persons who are committed to common political
ideology, philosophy and program may, subject to laws
made under sub-clause (c) of clause (2) of Article 17,
form and operate political parties, and generate, or cause
to be generated, publicity in order to secure support and
cooperation from the general public for their ideology,
philosophy and program or carry out other necessary
activity for this purpose.
(2) A political party formed in accordance with
clause (1) must register the party with the Election
Commission upon fulfilment of the procedures
established by law.
(3) A petition to be made for the purpose of
registration of a party in accordance with clause (2) must
be accompanied by the constitution and manifesto of the
concerned political party and such other documents as
required by the Federal law.
(4) For a petition to be made for the registration
of a party in accordance with clause (2), the political
party must fulfil the following conditions:
(a)

its constitution and rules must be
democratic,

(b)

its constitution must provide for
election of each of the office-bearers of
the party at the Federal and State levels
at least once in every five years;
provided that nothing shall bar the
making of provision by the constitution
of a political party to hold such election
(199)

within six months in the event of
failure to hold election of its officebearers within five years because of a
special circumstance.
(c)

there must be a provision of such
inclusive representation in its executive
committees at various levels as may be
reflecting the diversity of Nepal.

(5) If the name, objective, insignia or flag of a
political party is of such a nature as to jeopardize the
religious and communal unity of the country or to
fragment the country, that party shall not be registered.
270.

Prohibition on imposition of restrictions on political
parties: (1) Any law, arrangement or decision so made as
to impose any restriction on the formation and operation
of a political party and on the generation of publicity in
order to secure support and cooperation from the general
public for the ideology, philosophy and program of the
party in accordance with Article 269 shall be deemed to
be inconsistent with this Constitution and shall, ipso
facto, be void.
(2) Any law, arrangement or decision so made as
to allow for participation or involvement of only a single
political party or persons having similar political
ideology, philosophy or program in the elections or in
the political system of, or in the conduct of governance
of, the country shall be deemed to be inconsistent with
this Constitution and shall, ipso facto, be void.

271.

Registration required for securing recognition for the
purpose of contesting elections as political party: (1)
Every political party that is registered in accordance with
Article 269 and intends to secure recognition from the
Election Commission for the purposes of elections must

(200)

be registered with the Election Commission in fulfilment
of the procedures set forth in the Federal law.
(2) The political party must submit a yearly audit
report in addition to the matters set forth in clause (3) of
Article 269 along with an application to be made for the
purpose of clause (1) and also fulfil the terms set forth in
clause (4) of that Article.
272.

Other provisions relating to political parties: Provisions
relating to the formation, registration, operation and
facilities of political parties and other matters pertaining
thereto shall be as provided for in the Federal law.

(201)

Part-30
Emergency Power
273.

Emergency power: (1) If a grave emergency arises in
regard to the sovereignty, territorial integrity of Nepal or
the security of any part thereof, by war, external
aggression, armed rebellion, extreme economic disarray,
natural calamity or epidemic, the President may declare
or order a state of emergency in respect of the whole of
Nepal or of any specified part thereof.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in clause
(1), if there arises a grave emergency in a State by a
natural calamity or epidemic, the concerned State
Government may request the Government of Nepal to
declare or order a state of emergency in respect of the
whole of the State or of any specified part thereof, in
accordance with this Article.
(3) Every declaration or order made in accordance
with clause (1) shall be laid before both Houses of the
Federal Parliament for approval within one month after
the date of issuance of such proclamation or order.
(4) If a declaration or order laid for approval in
accordance with clause (3) is approved by at least twothirds majority of the total number of the then members
of both Houses of the Federal Parliament, the declaration
or order shall continue in force for a period of three
months from the date of its issuance.
(5) If a declaration or order laid for approval in
accordance with clause (3) is not approved in accordance
with clause (4), the declaration or order shall ipso facto
be inoperative.
(6)
Notwithstanding
anything
contained
elsewhere in this Article, prior to expiration of the period
mentioned in clause (4), a motion to extend the period of
(202)

the declaration or order of state of emergency as
mentioned in clause (1) for another period not exceeding
three months may be submitted to the Federal Parliament.
(7) If a motion mentioned in clause (6) is passed
by at least two-thirds majority of the total number of the
then members of both Houses of the Federal Parliament,
the declaration or order shall continue in force for the
period mentioned in that motion.
(8) In the event of dissolution of the House of
Representatives, the powers exercisable by the Federal
Parliament in accordance with clauses (3), (4), (6) and
(7) shall be exercised by the National Assembly.
(9) After the making of a declaration or order of a
state of emergency in accordance with clause (1), the
President may issue such orders as are necessary to meet
the exigencies. Orders so issued shall apply as of law so
long as the state of emergency is in operation.
(10) At the time of making a declaration or order
of a state of emergency in accordance with clause (1),
the fundamental rights as provided in Part-3 may be
suspended until the declaration or order is in operation.
Provided that Article 16, sub-clauses (c) and (d)
of clause (2) of Article 17, Article 18, clause (2) of
Article 19, Articles 20, 21, 22 and 24, clause (1) of
Article 26, Articles 29, 30, 31, 32, 35, clauses (1) and (2)
of Article 36, Articles 38 and 39, clauses (2) and (3) of
Article 40, Articles 41, 42, 43 and 45, the right to
constitutional remedy in relation to such Articles
pursuant to Article 46 and the right to seek the remedy of
habeas corpus shall not be suspended.
(11) If any Article of this Constitution is
suspended pursuant to clause (10), no petition may lie in
any court for the enforcement of the fundamental right
(203)

conferred by that Article nor may a question be raised in
any Court in that respect.
(12) If, during the continuance of a declaration or
order under this Article, any injury is caused to a person
from any act done by any official in bad faith, the victim
may, within three months from the date of termination of
that declaration or order, file a petition for compensation
for such injury. If such petition is made, the court may
order for compensation by, and punish, the perpetrator as
provided for in the Federal law.
(13) The President may, at any time, withdraw a
declaration or order of a state of emergency made in
accordance with this Article.

(204)

Part-31
Amendment to the Constitution
274.

Amendment to Constitution: (1) No amendment shall be
made to this Constitution in manner to be prejudicial to
the sovereignty, territorial integrity, independence of
Nepal and sovereignty vested in the people.
(2) Subject to clause (1) and other Articles of this
Constitution, a Bill to amend or repeal any Article of this
Constitution may be introduced in either House of the
Federal Parliament.
Provided that clause (1) shall not be amended.
(3) A Bill introduced pursuant to clause (2) shall
be publicly published for information to the general
public within thirty days of its introduction in the
concerned House.
(4) If a Bill introduced pursuant to clause (2) is
related with the alteration in the borders of any State or
matters set forth in Schedule-6, the Speaker or the
Chairperson of the concerned House must send that Bill
to the State Assembly for its consent, within thirty days
after its introduction in the Federal Parliament.
(5) The concerned State Assembly must, by a
majority of the total number of its the then members,
accept or reject the Bill presented for its consent pursuant
to clause (4) and give information thereof to the Federal
Parliament within three months.
Provided that if any State Assembly is not in
existence, such Bill must be either accepted or rejected
within three months after the date of holding of the first
meeting following the formation of that State Assembly.
(6) In the event of failure to give information of
acceptance or rejection of such Bill within the period set
(205)

forth in clause (5), nothing shall prevent the House of the
Federal Parliament in which the Bill was originated from
proceeding with the Bill.
(7) If the State Assembly, by its majority, gives a
notice of rejection of such Bill to the concerned House of
the Federal Parliament within the period under clause (5),
the Bill shall be inoperative.
(8) A Bill which does not require the consent of
the State Assembly or a Bill accepted by a majority of the
State Assembly under clause (5) must be passed by at
least two-thirds majority of the total number of the then
members of both Houses of the Federal Parliament.
(9) A Bill passed under clause (8) shall be
presented to the President for assent.
(10) The President shall give assent to a Bill
presented under clause (9), within fifteen days from the
date of its receipt, and the Constitution shall get amended
from the date of assent.

(206)

Part-32
Miscellaneous
275.

Provisions relating to referendum: (1) If a decision is
made by a two-thirds majority of the total number of the
then members of the Federal Parliament that it is
necessary to hold a referendum with respect to any
matter of national importance, decision on that matter
may be taken by way of referendum.
(2) Matters relating to referendum and other
relevant matters shall be as provided for in the Federal
law.

276.

Pardons: The President may, in accordance with law,
grant pardons, suspend, commute or remit any sentence
passed by any Court, judicial or quasi-judicial body or
administrative authority or body.

277.

Titles, honours and decorations: (1) The President shall
confer titles, honours and decorations to be conferred on
behalf of the State.
(2) No citizen of Nepal may, without the
approval of the Government of Nepal, accept any title,
honour or decoration from any foreign government.

278. Power to make treaties: (1) The Federation shall have the
power to make treaties or agreements.
(2) In making a treaty or agreement on a matter
falling within the list of State power, the Government of
Nepal must consult the concerned State.
(3) A State Council of Ministers may, with the
consent of the Government of Nepal, make contractual
agreements on financial and industrial matters.
279.

Ratification of, accession to, acceptance of, or approval
of, treaties or agreements: (1) The ratification of,
accession to, acceptance of, or approval of, treaties or
(207)

agreements to which Nepal or the Government of Nepal
is to become a party shall be as provided for in the
Federal law.
(2) Any law to be made pursuant to clause (1)
shall, inter alia, require that the ratification of, accession
to, acceptance of, or approval of, treaties or agreements
on the following subjects must be made by a majority of
two-thirds of the total number of the then members of
both Houses of the Federal Parliament:
(a)

peace and friendship,

(b)

defence and strategic alliance,

(c)

boundaries of the State of Nepal, and

(d)

natural resources, and the distribution
of their uses.

Provided that, out of the treaties or agreements
under sub-clauses (a) and (d), if any treaty or agreement
is of an ordinary nature, which does not affect the nation
extensively, seriously or in the long term, the ratification
of, accession to, acceptance of, or approval of, such
treaty or agreement may be made by a simple majority of
the members present in a meeting of the House of
Representatives.
(3) After the commencement of this Constitution,
unless a treaty or agreement is ratified, acceded to,
accepted or approved in accordance with this Article,
such treaty or agreement shall not apply to the
Government of Nepal or Nepal.
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in clauses
(1) and (2), no treaty or agreement may be concluded in
detrimental to the territorial integrity of Nepal.
280.

Special provision relating to discharge of functions of
President: If the offices of both the President and the
(208)

Vice-President fall vacant in accordance with this
Constitution, the Speaker of the House of
Representatives shall discharge the functions required to
be performed by the President under this Constitution
until election to the President or Vice-President is held
and he or she assumes office.
281.

Appraisal and review of special rights: The Government
of Nepal shall make appraisal and review of the
implementation of special rights of the women and Dalit
community and impacts thereof, on the basis of human
development index, concurrently with a national census
to be held in every ten years.

282.

Ambassadors and special emissaries: (1) The President
may, on the basis of the principle of inclusion, appoint
Nepalese ambassadors, and special emissaries for any
specific purposes.
(2) The President shall receive letters of
credentials from foreign ambassadors and diplomatic
representatives.

283.

Appointments to be made in accordance with inclusive
principle: Appointments to offices of Constitutional
Organs and Bodies shall be made in accordance with the
inclusive principle.

284.

Provisions relating to Constitutional Council: (1) There
shall be a Constitutional Council for making
recommendations for appointment of the Chief Justice
and Chiefs and officials of the Constitutional Bodies in
accordance with this Constitution, which shall consist of
the following as the Chairperson and members:
(a)

The Prime Minister

(b)

The Chief Justice

(209)

- Chairperson
- Member

(c)

The Speaker of the House
of Representatives
- Member

(d)

The Chairperson of the
National Assembly
- Member

(e)

Leader of Opposition Party
in
the
House
of
Representatives
- Member

(f)

Deputy Speaker of the
House of Representatives
- Member

(2) While making a recommendation for
appointment to the office of the Chief Justice, the
Constitutional Council shall include the Minister for Law
and Justice of the Government of Nepal, as its member.
(3) The Constitutional Council must make a
recommendation for appointment under this Constitution
before one month of the vacation of the office of the
Chief Justice or a chief or official of a Constitutional
Body.
Provided that if such office falls vacant because
of death or resignation, it may so make recommendation
for appointment that the office is fulfilled within one
month after the date of vacancy.
(4) Other functions, duties and powers of the
Constitutional Council and rules of procedures on the
appointment of the Chief Justice or chiefs or officials of
Constitutional Bodies shall be as provided for in the
Federal law.
(5) The Chief Secretary of the Government of
Nepal shall act as the secretary of the Constitutional
Council.
285.

Constitution of government service: (1) The Government
of Nepal may, in order to run the administration of the
(210)

country, constitute the Federal civil service and such
other Federal government services as may be required.
The constitution, operation and conditions of service of
such services shall be as provided for in the Federal Act.
(2) Positions in the Federal civil service as well
as all Federal government services shall be filled through
competitive examinations, on the basis of open and
proportional inclusive principle.
(3) The State Council of Ministers, Village
Executives and Municipal Executives may by law
constitute and operate various government services as
required for the operation of their administration.
286.

Election Constituency Delimitation Commission: (1) The
Government of Nepal may constitute an Election
Constituency Delimitation Commission, to determine
election constituencies for the purpose of election to the
members of the Federal Parliament and members of the
State Assemblies in accordance with this Constitution,
which shall consist of the following as the Chairperson
and members:
(a) Retired Judge
Supreme Court

of

the
-Chairperson

(b) One Geographer
(c) One
sociologist
demographer

-Member
or

(d) One administration expert
or jurist
(e) Gazetted special class
officer of the Government
of Nepal
(211)

-Member

-Member
-Membersecretary

(2) The term of office of the Election
Constituency Delimitation Commission shall be as
prescribed at the time of its constitution.
(3) A person shall be qualified to be appointed as
the Chairperson or a member of the Election
Constituency Delimitation Commission if he or she
possesses the following qualification:
(a)

holding at least bachelor’s degree in
related subject from a recognized
university,

(b)

having attained the age of forty-five
years, and

(c)

having high moral character.

(4) The office of the Chairperson or a member of
the Election Constituency Delimitation Commission
shall be vacant in any of the following circumstances:
(a)

if he or she tenders resignation in
writing,

(b)

if he or she is removed by the
Government of Nepal, Council of
Ministers,

(c)

if he or she dies.

(5) While determining election constituencies
pursuant to this Article, the Election Constituency
Delimitation Commission shall, subject to sub-clause
(a) of clause (1) of Article 84, determine the
constituencies in a state in accordance with the
federal law, having regard to the population as the
main basis and geography as the second basis for



Amended by the First Amendment.
(212)

representation, and there shall be at least one election
constituency in each district within the state.
(6) While delimitating election constituencies
pursuant to clause (5), regard must be had to, inter
alia,  the population and geographical convenience,
density of population, geographical specificity,
administrative and transportation convenience,
community and cultural aspects of the constituencies.
(7) No question may be raised in any court on
any matter of the determination, or review, of election
constituencies made by the Election Constituency
Delimitation Commission.
(8) The Election Constituency Delimitation
Commission shall submit a report on the works it has
performed to the Government of Nepal.
(9) The Government of Nepal, Council of
Ministers, shall lay the report received pursuant to clause
(8) before the Federal Parliament and send it to the
Election Commission for implementation.
(10) The Election Constituency Delimitation
Commission shall determine its rules of procedures
itself.
(11) The remuneration and facilities of the
Chairperson and the members of the Election
Constituency Delimitation Commission shall be similar
to those of the Chief Election Commissioner and the
Election Commissioners of the Election Commission,
respectively.



Inserted by the First Amendment.
(213)

(12) The election constituencies delimited in
accordance with clause (5) must be reviewed in every
twenty years.
(13) The Government of Nepal shall provide such
employees as may be required for the Election
Constituency Delimitation Commission.
287.

Language Commission: (1) The Government of Nepal
shall, no later than one year of the commencement of this
Constitution, constitute a Language Commission
comprising representation of States.
(2) The Language Commission shall consist of
one Chairperson and a required number of members.
(3) The term of office of the Chairperson and
members of the Language Commission shall be six years
from the date of their appointment. They may not be
reappointed.
(4) A person shall be qualified to be appointed as
the Chairperson or a member of the Language
Commission if he or she possesses the following
qualification:
(a)

holding master’s degree in related
subject from a recognized university,

(b)

having gained at least twenty years of
experience in the fields of study,
teaching and research on various
languages of Nepal,

(c)

having completed the age of forty-five
years, and

(d)

having high moral character.

(5) The office of the Chairperson or a member of
the Language Commission shall be vacant in any of the
following circumstances:
(214)

(a)

if he or she tenders resignation in
writing,

(b)

if he or she is removed by the
Government of Nepal, Council of
Ministers,

(c)

if he completes the age of sixty five
years,

(d)

if he or she dies.

(6)
The functions, duties and powers of the
Language Commission shall be as follows:
(a)

to determine the criteria to be fulfilled
for the recognition of the official
language and make recommendations
on languages to the Government of
Nepal,

(b)

to make recommendations to the
Government of Nepal, on the measures
to be adopted for the protection,
promotion and development of
languages,

(c)

to measure the levels of development
of mother tongues and make
suggestions to the Government of
Nepal, on the potentiality of their use in
education,

(d)

to study,
languages.

research

and

monitor

(7) The Language Commission shall complete its
task under sub-clause (a) of clause (6) no later than five
years after the date of its constitution.

(215)

(8) The Government of Nepal may, in
coordination with a State Government, establish a branch
of the Language Commission in that State.
(9) The other functions, duties, powers and rules
of procedures of the Language Commission shall be as
provided for in the Federal law.
288.

Capital: (1) The capital of Nepal shall be situated in
Kathmandu.
(2) The capital of a State under this Constitution
shall be as decided by a two-thirds majority of the
number of the then members of the concerned State
Assembly.
(3) The business of a State shall be conducted
through the place as specified by the Government of
Nepal until decision is made in accordance with clause
(2).

289.

Special provision relating to citizenship of officials: (1)
In order for a person to be elected, nominated or
appointed to the office of President, Vice-President,
Prime Minister, Chief Justice, Speaker of the House of
Representatives, Chief of State, Chief Minister, Speaker
of a State Assembly and chief of a security body, the
person must have obtained the citizenship of Nepal by
descent.
(2) A person who has obtained the citizenship of
Nepal by descent, a person who has obtained the
naturalized citizenship of Nepal or a person who has
obtained the citizenship of Nepal by birth shall also be
qualified for the office of a constitutional body other
than that mentioned in clause (1).
Provided that the person must have resided in
Nepal for at least ten years in the case of a person who
has obtained the naturalized citizenship of Nepal, and for
(216)

at least five years in the case of a person who has
obtained the citizenship of Nepal by birth or who has
obtained the naturalized citizenship of Nepal in
accordance with clause (6) of Article 11.
290.

Provisions relating to Guthi (trusts): (1) The Federal
Parliament shall make necessary laws in relation to the
rights of the trust and the farmers enjoying possessory
rights over trust lands in a manner not to be prejudicial to
the basic norms of the trusts.
(2) Other matters relating to trusts shall be as
provided by the federal law.

291.

Not to be qualified for appointment: (1) Notwithstanding
anything contained elsewhere in this Constitution, a
citizen of Nepal who has obtained a foreign permanent
residence permit shall not be qualified for election,
nomination or appointment to an office to be elected,
nominated or appointed pursuant to this Constitution.
Provided that nothing shall prevent electing,
nominating or appointing a person who has renounced
such foreign permanent residence permit to such office
after the expiry of a period of at least three months.
(2) Other matters relating to the citizens of Nepal
who have obtained foreign permanent residence permits
as mentioned in clause (1) shall be as provided for in the
Federal law.

292.

Provisions relating to parliamentary hearings: (1)
Parliamentary hearings shall be conducted as to
appointments to the offices of the Chief Justice and
Judges of the Supreme Court, members of the Judicial
Council, chiefs and members of Constitutional Bodies,
who are appointed on the recommendation of the
Constitutional Council under this Constitution, and to the

(217)

offices of ambassadors, as provided for in the Federal
law.
(2) For the purposes of clause (1), there shall be
formed a fifteen-member joint committee consisting of
members of both Houses of the Federal Parliament, in
accordance with the Federal law.
(3) No member of the joint committee under
clause (2) shall practice law in the Supreme Court during
that term of the Federal Parliament.
293.

Monitoring of functioning of Constitutional Bodies: The
chiefs and officials of the Constitutional Bodies must be
accountable and responsible to the Federal Parliament.
The committees of the House of Representatives may
monitor and evaluate the functioning, including reports,
of the Constitutional Bodies, other than the National
Human Rights Commission, and give necessary direction
or advice.

294.

Annual reports of Constitutional Bodies: (1) Every
Constitutional Body under this Constitution shall submit
an annual report of its functioning to the President, and
the President shall cause that report to be laid through
the Prime Minister before the Federal Parliament.
(2) The matters to be set out in the annual report
under clause (1) shall be as provided for in the Federal
law.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in clause
(1), a Constitutional Body may prepare a separate report
in relation to the functioning of each State and submit it
to the Chief of State.

(218)

Part-33
Transitional Provisions
295.

Constitution of Federal Commission: (1) The
Government of Nepal may constitute a Federal
Commission for making suggestions on matters relating
to the boundaries of States.
(2) The names of the States under clause (3) of
Article 56 shall be set by a two thirds majority of the
total number of members of the concerned State
Assemblies.
(3) The Government of Nepal shall constitute a
commission for the determination of the number and
boundaries of Village Bodies, Municipalities and
Special, Protected or Autonomous Regions to be formed
under clauses (4) and (5) of Article 56. The commission
must determine the number and boundaries of the
Village Bodies, Municipalities and Special, Protected or
Autonomous Regions in accordance with the criteria set
by the Government of Nepal.
(4) The commission under clause (3) shall be
constituted no later than six months of the date of
commencement of this Constitution. Its term shall be one
year.

296.

Constituent Assembly to be converted into LegislatureParliament: (1) The Constituent Assembly existing at the
time of commencement of this Constitution shall ipso
facto be converted into the Legislature-Parliament after
the commencement of this Constitution, and the term of
such Legislature-Parliament shall exist until 7 Magha
2074.
Provided that if an election is held to the House
of Representatives set forth in this Constitution prior to
the expiration of that term, the Legislature-Parliament
(219)

shall continue to exist until the day before the day
specified for the filing of nominations of candidates for
that election.
(2) The Bills under consideration of the
Legislature-Parliament at the time of commencement of
this Constitution shall ipso facto be transferred to the
Legislature-Parliament set forth in clause (1).
(3) The Legislature-Parliament set forth in clause
(1) shall perform the business required to be performed
by the Federal Parliament in accordance with this
Constitution until election to the House of
Representatives is held pursuant to this Constitution.
(4) The legislative power of the State Assembly
with respect of matters set forth in Schedule-6 shall,
upon the commencement of this Constitution, be vested
in the Legislature-Parliament set forth in clause (1) until
the State Assembly is formed. Any law so made shall be
inoperative in relation to that State after one year of the
date of formation of the State Assembly set forth in this
Constitution.
(5) The Legislature-Parliament Secretariat, its
Secretary General, Secretary and employees existing at
the time of commencement of this Constitution shall,
subject to the conditions of service in force at the time of
their appointment, exist in the Federal Parliament
Secretariat set forth in this Constitution.
(6) Where the Legislature-Parliament is in recess
at the time of commencement of this Constitution, the
President shall summon its session no later than seven
days after the date of commencement of this
Constitution. The President shall thereafter summon a
session of the Legislature-Parliament from time to time.

(220)

297.

Provisions relating to President and Vice-President: (1)
The President and the Vice-President existing at the time
of commencement of this Constitution shall continue to
hold their respective offices until other President and
Vice-President are elected in accordance with this
Article.
(2) The Legislature-Parliament set forth in clause
(1) of Article 296 shall, on the basis of political
understanding, elect the President and the VicePresident, no later than one month after the date of the
commencement of this Constitution where the
Legislature-Parliament is not in recess at the time of
commencement of this Constitution and after the date on
which the session is summoned in accordance with
clause (6) of Article 296 where the LegislatureParliament is in recess.
(3) In the event of failure to have an
understanding under clause (2), the President and the
Vice-President must be elected by a majority of all the
then members of the Legislature-Parliament.
(4) If the office of the President or Vice-President
elected in accordance with clause (2) or (3) falls vacant
for any reason, the President or Vice-President shall be
elected by the Legislature-Parliament in accordance with
this Article until the Federal Parliament is formed.
(5) The term of office of the President or VicePresident elected in accordance with this Article shall
continue to exist until another President or VicePresident elected by an electoral college set forth in
Article 62 assumes office.
(6) The office of the President or Vice-President
elected in accordance with this Article shall become
vacant in any of the following circumstances:

(221)

(a)

if the President tenders resignation in
writing to the Vice-President and the
Vice-President, before the President,

(b)

if a motion of impeachment against him
or her is passed in accordance with
clause (7),

(c)

if another President or Vice-President
elected by an electoral college set forth
in Article 62 assumes office,

(d)

if he or she dies.

(7) At least one fourth of the total number of the
then members of the Legislature-Parliament set forth in
clause (1) of Article 296 may move a motion of
impeachment against the President or Vice-President
elected in accordance with this Article on the ground of
serious violation of this Constitution and law. If the
motion is passed by at least two thirds majority of the
total number of the then members of the LegislatureParliament, he or she shall relive of his or her office
298.

Provisions relating to formation of Council of Ministers:
(1) The Council of Ministers existing at the time of
commencement of this Constitution shall continue to
exist until the Council of Ministers set forth in clause (2)
is formed.
(2) The Prime Minister shall, on the basis of
political understanding, be elected no later than seven
days after the date of the commencement of this
Constitution where the Legislature-Parliament is not in
recess at the time of commencement of this Constitution,
and after the date on which the session of the
Legislature-Parliament summoned in accordance with
clause (6) of Article 296 commences where the
Legislature-Parliament is in recess, and a Council of
(222)

Ministers shall
chairpersonship.

be

formed

under

his

or

her

(3) In the event of failure to have an
understanding under clause (2), the Prime Minister shall
be elected by a majority of all the then members of the
Legislature-Parliament.
(4) The composition and allocation of portfolios
of the Council of Ministers to be formed in accordance
with this Article shall be made through mutual
understanding.
(5) The Council of Ministers to be formed in
accordance with this Article shall consist of a Deputy
Prime Minister and other Ministers, as required.
(6) The Prime Minister appointed in accordance
with this Article shall, in appointing Ministers in
accordance with clause (5), appoint Ministers from
amongst the members of the Legislature-Parliament, on
the recommendation of the concerned party.
(7) The Prime Minister and other Ministers
appointed in accordance with this Article shall be
collectively responsible to the Legislature-Parliament,
and the Ministers shall be individually responsible to the
Prime Minister and the Legislature- Parliament for the
work of their respective Ministries.
(8) The office of the Prime Minister appointed in
accordance with this Article shall be vacant in any of the
following circumstances:
(a)

if he or she tenders resignation in writing
to the President,

(b)

if a vote of no-confidence is passed
against him or her or a vote of

(223)

confidence is not passed in accordance
with clause (14),
(c)

if he or she ceases to be a member of the
Legislature-Parliament,

(d)

if he or she dies.

(9) The office of the Deputy Prime Minister,
Minister, Minister of State and Assistance Minister
appointed in accordance with this Article shall be vacant
in any of the following circumstances:
(a)

if he or she tenders resignation in writing
to the Prime Minister,

(b)

if the Prime Minister is removed from
office in accordance with clause (8),

(c)

if he or she is removed from office by
the
Prime
Minister
on
the
recommendation or advice of the
concerned party,

(d)

if he or she dies.

(10) Even though the office of the Prime Minister
falls vacant under clause (8), the same Council of
Ministers shall continue to act until another Council of
Ministers is constituted.
(11) If the Prime Minister appointed in
accordance with this Article dies, the Deputy Prime
Minister or senior-most Minister shall act as the Prime
Minister until another Prime Minister is appointed.
(12) The Prime Minister appointed in accordance
with this Article may, whenever he or she considers
necessary or appropriate to show/clarify that he or she
has confidence from the Legislature-Parliament, table a
resolution to that effect in the Legislature-Parliament for
the vote of confidence.
(224)

(13) At least one-fourth of the total number of
the then members of the Legislature-Parliament may
table in writing a motion of no-confidence against the
Prime Minister appointed in accordance with this Article.
Provided that a motion of no confidence shall not
be tabled more than once in six moths' period against the
same Prime Minister appointed in accordance with this
Article.
(14) A motion tabled under clause (12) or (13)
shall be decided by a majority of the total number of the
then members of the Legislature Parliament.
(15) The Government of Nepal shall, after the
commencement of this Constitution, exercise the powers
of a State until the Council of Ministers of the State set
forth in this Constitution is formed.
299.

Provisions relating to Speaker and Deputy Speaker: (1)
The Speaker and Deputy Speaker existing at the time of
commencement of this Constitution shall continue to
hold their respective offices until another Speaker and
Deputy Speaker is elected pursuant to this Constitution.
(2) The members of the Legislature-Parliament
shall, on the basis of political understanding, elect one
Speaker and one Deputy Speaker from themselves no
later than twenty days after the date of the
commencement of this Constitution where the
Legislature-Parliament is not in recess at the time of
commencement of this Constitution, and after the date on
which the session of the Legislature-Parliament is
summoned in accordance with clause (6) of Article 296
where the Legislature-Parliament is in recess.
(3) In the event of failure to have an
understanding under clause (2), a member of the
Legislature-Parliament who commands a majority of all
(225)

the then members of the Legislature-Parliament shall be
deemed to be elected as the Speaker or Deputy Speaker.
(4) In holding electing in accordance with clause
(2) or (3), the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker shall be
members representing different political parties in the
Legislature-Parliament.
(5) In discharging his or her functions in
accordance with this Constitution, the Speaker or Deputy
Speaker shall so discharge functions in the capacity of a
neutral person without standing for or against any
political party whatsoever.
(6) The office of the Speaker or Deputy Speaker
shall become vacant in any of the following
circumstances:
(a)

if he or she resigns in writing,

(b)

if he or she ceases to be a member of the
Legislature-Parliament,

(c)

if a resolution is passed by a majority of
at least two-thirds of the total number of
the members of the LegislatureParliament to the effect that his or her
conduct is not compatible with his or her
office,

(d)

if he or she dies.

(7) The Deputy Speaker or another member shall
preside over a meeting at which deliberations are to be
held on a resolution that the conduct of the Speaker of
the Legislature-Parliament is not compatible with his or
her office, and the Speaker may take part and vote in the
deliberations on such resolution.
(8) Other procedures on the election to the
Speaker and Deputy Speaker and procedures on the
(226)

moving and passage of a motion that the Speaker or
Deputy Speaker has committed conduct not compatible
with his or her office shall be as provided by the then
prevailing rules of the Legislature-Parliament.
300.

Provisions relating to Judiciary: (1) The Supreme Court,
Constituent Assembly Court, Appellate Courts and
District Courts existing at the time of commencement of
this Constitution shall continue to exist until the structure
of Judiciary set forth in this Constitution is set up.
Nothing in this Constitution shall be deemed to bar the
settlement by respective Courts of the cases already filed
in such Courts prior to the commencement of this
Constitution and of the cases to be filed after the
commencement of this Constitution.
(2) The Chief Justice and Judges of the Supreme
Court, Chief Judges and Judges of the Appellate Courts
and Judges of the District Courts at the time of
commencement of this Constitution shall be deemed to
have been appointed under this Constitution.
(3) The High Courts set forth in Article 139 shall
be established no later than one year after the date of
commencement of this Constitution. The Appellate Courts
existing at the time of commencement of this Constitution
shall be dissolved after the establishment of such Courts.
(4) After the establishment of the High Courts in
accordance with clause (3), the cases sub judice in the
Appellate Courts shall be transferred to such High
Courts as specified by the Government of Nepal, in
consultation with the Judicial Council, by notification in
the Nepal Gazette.
(5) After the establishment of the High Courts in
accordance with clause (3), the Chief Justice shall, on
recommendation of the Judicial Council, post the Chief
Judges and Judges of the Appellate Courts who are
(227)

holding office at the time of commencement of this
Constitution to the offices of the Chief Judges and
Judges of the High Courts.
(6) The Additional Judges of the Appellate
Courts who are holding office at the time of
commencement of this Constitution may continue to
hold office until the term specified at the time of their
appointment.
(7) The cases on criminal offences punishable by
imprisonment for a term of more than one year and sub
judice in any body other than a Court at the time of
commencement of this Constitution shall, after the
commencement of this Constitution, be transferred to the
concerned District Court.
301.

Provisions relating to Constitutional Bodies and officials
thereof: (1) The Constitutional Bodies which are existing
at the time of commencement of this Constitution and
provided in this Constitution shall be deemed to have
been formed under this Constitution, and nothing shall be
deemed to bar the settlement of the matters under
consideration of such Bodies subject to this Constitution.
(2) The chiefs or officials of the Constitutional
Bodies holding office at the time of commencement of
this Constitution shall be deemed to have been appointed
in accordance with this Constitution and shall continue to
hold their respective offices subject to the conditions of
services at the time of their appointments.
(3) The officials holding office in the
Commission for the Investigation of the Abuse of
Authority and the Public Service Commission, at the time
of commencement of this Constitution, in excess of the
number specified in this Constitution, shall continue to
hold their respective offices subject to the conditions of
services at the time of their appointments.
(228)

302.

Formation and operation of government services at State
and Local levels: (1) The Government of Nepal shall
make necessary provisions for the delivery of services at
the State and Local levels.
(2) The Government of Nepal may, in making
provisions under clause (1), arrange for the delivery of
services by making adjustment of the employees serving
in the government services at the time of commencement
of this Constitution with the Federal, State and Local
levels in accordance with law.

303.

Provisions relating to Local Bodies: (1) The Local
Bodies existing at the time of Commencement of this
Constitution shall continue to exist until the
determination of the number and areas of the Local level
in accordance with this Constitution.
(2) Election to the officials of the Local Bodies
existing under clause (1) shall be held in accordance with
law.
(3) The officials of the Local Bodies elected in
accordance with clause (2) shall continue to hold office
until election to the Local level is held in accordance
with this Constitution.

304.

Existing laws to remain in force: (1) The Nepal laws in
force at the time of commencement of this Constitution
shall continue to be in force until such laws are repealed
or amended.
Provided that any law which is inconsistent with
this Constitution shall ipso facto be invalid to the extent
of such inconsistency, after one year of the date on
which the first session of the Federal Parliament set forth
in this Constitution is held.

(229)

(2) Acts relating to peace process under the
Interim Constitution of Nepal, 2007 (2063) shall be
deemed to have been done under this Constitution.
305.

Power to remove difficulties: If any difficulty arises in
connection with the implementation of this Constitution
until the commencement of the first session of the
Federal Parliament, upon being elected in accordance
with this Constitution, the President may, on the
recommendation of the Government of Nepal, Council
of Ministers, issue necessary orders to remove such
difficulty; and such orders must be submitted to the
Legislature-Parliament or Federal Parliament, held
immediately after the issue such orders, for approval.

(230)

Part-34
Definitions and Interpretations
306.

Definitions and interpretations: (1) Unless the subject or
the context otherwise requires, in this Constitution,(a)

"minorities" means ethnic, linguistic and
religious groups whose population is less
than the percentage specified by the
Federal law, and includes groups that
have their distinct ethnic, religious or
linguistic characteristics, aspirations to
protect such features and subjected to
discrimination and oppression,

(b)

"law" means a Federal law, State law and
Local law,

(c)

"Article" means
Constitution,

(d)

"Municipality" means and includes a
Municipal
Corporation
and
Submunicipal Corporation.

(e)

"citizen" means a citizen of Nepal,

(f)

"State" means the area and form of a
federal unit of Nepal divided into the
Federal units in accordance with this
Constitution,

(g)

"remuneration" means and includes
salary, allowance, pension and any other
form of emolument and facility,

(h)

"state power" means the power relating to
the Executive, Legislative and Judiciary
of the state, and includes residual power.

(231)

an

article

of

this

(i)

"Bill" means a draft of amendment to the
Constitution or of an Act which has been
introduced in the Federal Parliament or a
State Assembly,

(j)

"Federation" means the federal level that
is the apex unit of the federal structure,

(k)

"Federal Units" means the Federation,
State and Local levels,

(l)

"Constitutional Bodies" means the
Commission for the Investigation of
Abuse of Authority, Auditor General,
Public Service Commission, Election
Commission, National Human Rights
Commission, National Natural Resources
and Fiscal Commission, National Women
Commission, National Dalit Commission,
National
Inclusion
Commission,
Indigenous Nationalities Commission,
Madhesi
Commission,
Tharu
Commission and Muslim Commission,

(m)

"marginalized" means communities that
are made politically, economically and
socially backward, are unable to enjoy
services and facilities because of
discrimination and oppression and of
geographical remoteness or deprived
thereof and are in lower status than the
human development standards mentioned
in Federal law, and includes highly
marginalized groups and groups on the
verge of extinction,

(n)

"Local level" means the Village Bodies,
Municipalities and District Assemblies to

(232)

be established in accordance with this
Constitution.
(2) Unless the subject or the context otherwise
requires, the legal provisions relating to interpretation of
laws shall, subject to the provisions of this Constitution,
apply to the interpretation of this Constitution in the
same manner as that provisions apply to the
interpretation of the Nepal laws.

(233)

Part-35
Short Title, Commencement and Repeal
307.

Short title and commencement: (1) This Constitution may
be cited as the "Constitution of Nepal".
(2) This Constitution shall commence on 20
September 2015 (3rd day of the month of Ashwin of the
year 2072 Bikram Sambat).

308.

Repeal: The Interim Constitution of Nepal, 2007 (2063)
is hereby repealed.

(234)

Schedule-1
(Relating to clause (2) of Article 8)
National Flag of Nepal

The method of making the National Flag of Nepal
(a)

Method of making the shape inside the border
(1)

On the lower portion of a crimson cloth draw a
line AB of the required length from left to right.

(2)

From A draw a line AC perpendicular to AB
making AC equal to AB plus one third AB. From
AC mark off D making line AD equal to line AB.
Join B and D.

(3)

From BD mark off E making BE equal to AB.

(4)

Touching E draw a line FG, starting from the point
F on line AC, parallel to AB to the right hand-side.
Mark off FG equal to AB.
(235)

(5)
(b)

Join C and G.

Method of making the moon
(6)

From AB mark off AH making AH equal to onefourth of line AB and starting from H draw a line
HI parallel to line AC touching line CG at point I.

(7)

Bisect CF at J and draw a line JK parallel to AB
touching CG at point K.

(8)

Let L be the point where lines JK and HI cut one
another.

(9)

Join J and G.

(10)

Let M be the point where line JG and HI cut one
another.

(11)

With centre M and with a distance shortest from
M to BD mark off N on the lower portion of line
HI.

(12)

Touching M and starting from O, a point on AC,
draw a line from left to right parallel to AB.

(13)

With centre L and radius LN draw a semi-circle
on the lower portion and let P and Q be the points
where it touches the line OM respectively.

(14)

With centre M and radius MQ draw a semi-circle
on the lower portion touching P and Q.

(15)

With centre N and radius NM draw an arc
touching PNQ at R and S. Join RS. Let T be the
point where RS and HI cut one another.

(16)

With centre T and radius TS draw a semi-circle on
the upper portion of PNQ touching it at two
points.

(17)

With centre T and radius TM draw an arc on the
upper portion of PNQ touching at two points.
(236)

(18)

(c)

(d)

Eight equal and similar triangles of the moon are
to be made in the space lying inside the semicircle of No. (16) and outside the arc of No. (17)
of this Schedule.

Method of making the sun
(19)

Bisect line AF at U, and draw a line UV parallel to
AB line touching line BE at V.

(20)

With centre W, the point where HI and UV cut
one another and radius MN draw a circle.

(21)

With centre W and radius LN draw a circle.

(22)

Twelve equal and similar triangles of the sun are
to be made in the space enclosed by the circles of
No. (20) and of No. (21) with the two apexes of
two triangles touching line HI.

Method of making the border
(23)

The width of the border will be equal to the width
TN. This will be of deep blue colour and will be
provided on all the side of the flag. However, on
the five angles of the flag the external angles will
be equal to the internal angles.

(24)

The above mentioned border will be provided if
the flag is to be used with a rope. On the other
hand, if it is to be hoisted on a pole, the hole on
the border on the side AC can be extended
according to requirements.

Explanation: The lines HI, RS, FE, ED, JG, OQ, JK and
UV are imaginary. Similarly, the external and internal
circles of the sun and the other arcs except the crescent
moon are also imaginary. These are not shown on the
flag.
Note bene: The size of the National Flag of Nepal shall be as
determined by the Government of Nepal.
(237)

Schedule-2
(Relating to clause (1) of Article 9)
National Anthem of Nepal
Sayaun Thunga Phool Ka Hami Eutai Mala Nepali
Sarvavhaum Vai Failiyeka Mechi Mahakali
Prakitika Koti Koti Sampada Ko Aanchala
Bir Haruka Ragata Le Swatantra Ra Atala
Gyana Bhumi Shanti Bhumi Terai Pahad Himala
Akhanda Yo Pyaro Hamro Matri Bhumi Nepal
Bahul Jati Bhasa Dharma Sanskriti Chan Bishala
Agragami Rastra Hamro Jaya Jaya Nepal.

(238)

Schedule-3
(Relating to clause (2) of Article 9)
Coat of Arms of Nepal

Note bene:

This Coat of Arms may be made in larger
or smaller size as per necessity. The
colour determined by the Government of
Nepal shall be used on it.

(239)

Schedule-4
(Relating to clause (3) of Article 56)
States, and Districts to be included in the concerned States

State No. 1

State No. 2

1. Taplejung

1. Saptari

2. Panchthar

2. Siraha

3. Ilam

3. Dhanusa

4. Sankhuwasabha

4. Mahottari

5. Tehrathum

5. Sarlahi

6. Dhankuta

6. Rautahat

7. Bhojpur

7. Bara

8. Khotang

8. Parsa

9. Solukhumbu
10. Okhaldhunga
11. Udayapur
12. Jhapa
13. Morang
14. Sunsari

(240)

State No. 3

State No. 4

1. Dolakha

1. Gorkha

2. Ramechhap

2. Lamjung

3. Sindhuli

3. Tanahun

4. Kavrepalanchok

4. Kaski

5. Sindhupalchok

5. Manang

6. Rasuwa

6. Mustang

7.Nuwakot

7. Parbat

8. Dhading

8. Syangja

9. Chitwan

9. Myagdi

10. Makawanpur

10. Baglung

11. Bhaktapur

11.Nawalparasi
Bardaghat Susta)

12. Lalitpur
13. Kathmandu

(241)

(East

of

State No. 5

State No. 6

1. Nawalparasi (West of 1.Rukum
Bardaghat Susta)
(Western Part)
2. Rupandehi

2. Salyan

3. Kapilbastu

3. Dolpa

4. Palpa

4. Jumla

5. Arghakhanchi

5. Mugu

6. Gulmi

6. Humla

7.Rukun (Eastern Part)

7. Kalikot

8. Rolpa

8. Jajarkot

9. Pyuthan

9. Dailekh

10. Daang

10. Surkhet

11. Banke
12. Bardiya

(242)

State No. 7
1.Bajura
2.Bajhang
3. Doti
4. Achham
5. Darchula
6. Baitadi
7. Dadeldhura
8. Kanchanpur
9. Kailali

Schedule-5
(Relating to clause (1) of Article 57, and Article 109)
List of Federal Power
S.N.
1.

Matters
Relating to defence and military
(a) Protection of national unity and territorial
integrity
(b) Relating to national security

2.

War and defence

3.

Arms and ammunitions factories and production
thereof

4.

Central Police, Armed Police Force, national
intelligence and investigation, peace, security

5.

Central planning, central bank, finance policies,
monetary and banking, monetary policies, foreign
grants, aid and loans

6.

Foreign and diplomatic affairs, international relations
and United Nations related matters

7.

International treaties or agreements, extradition,
mutual legal assistance and international borders,
international boundary rivers

8.

Telecommunications, allocation of radio frequency,
radio, television and postal matters

9.

Customs, excise-duty, value-added tax, corporate
income tax, individual income tax, remuneration tax,
passport fee, visa fee, tourism fee, service charge and
fee, penalty
(243)

10.

Federal civil service, judicial service and other
government services

11.

Policies relating to conservation and multiple uses of
water resources

12.

Inland and inter-State electricity transmission lines

13.

Central statistics (national and international standards
and quality)

14.

Central level large electricity, irrigation and other
projects

15.

Central universities, central level academies,
universities standards and regulation, central libraries

16.

Health policies, health services, health standards,
quality and monitoring, national or specialised service
providing hospitals, traditional treatment services and
communicable disease control

17.

Federal Parliament, Federal Executive, Local level
related affairs, special structure

18.

International trade, exchange, port, quarantine

19.

Civil aviation, international airports

20.

National transportation policies, management of
railways and national highways

21.

Laws relating to the Supreme Court, High Courts,
District Courts and administration of justice

22.

Citizenship, passport, visa, immigration

23.

Atomic energy, air space and astronomy

24.

Intellectual property (including patents, designs,
trademarks and copyrights)
(244)

25.

Measurement

26.

Mines excavation

27.

National and international environment management,
national parks, wildlife reserves and wetlands,
national forest policies, carbon services

28.

Insurance policies, securities, cooperatives regulation

29.

Land use policies, human settlement development
policies, tourism policies, environment adaptation

30.

Criminal and civil laws making

31.

Security printing

32.

Social security and poverty alleviation

33.

Constitutional Bodies, commissions of national
importance

34.

Sites of archaeological importance and ancient
monuments

35.

Any matter not enumerated in the Lists of Federal
Powers, State Powers and Local level Powers or in
the Concurrent List and any matter not specified in
this Constitution and in the Federal laws

(245)

Schedule-6
(Relating to clause (2) of Article 57, clause (4) of Article 162,
Article 197, clause (3) of Article 231, clause (7) of Article 232,
clause (4) of Article 274 and clause (4) of Article 296)
List of State Power
S.N.

Matters

1.

State police administration and peace and order

2.

Operation of banks and financial institutions in
accordance with the policies of Nepal Rastra Bank,
cooperative institutions, foreign grants and assistance
with the consent of the Centre

3.

Operation of Radio, F.M., television

4.

House and land registration fee, motor vehicle tax,
entertainment tax, advertisement tax, tourism, agroincome tax, service charge, fee, penalty

5.

State civil service and other government services

6.

State statistics

7.

State level electricity, irrigation and water supply
services, navigation

8.

State universities,
museums

9.

Health services

10.

Matters relating to the State Assembly, State Council
of Ministers

11.

Intra-State trade

12.

State highways

higher

(246)

education,

libraries,

13.

State bureau of investigation

14.

Physical management and other necessary matters of
State governmental offices

15.

State Public Service Commission

16.

Management of lands, land records

17.

Exploration and management of mines

18.

Protection and use of languages, scripts, cultures, fine
arts and religions

19.

Use of forests and waters and management of
environment within the State

20.

Agriculture and livestock development, factories,
industrialization, trade, business, transportation

21.

Management of trusts (Guthi)

(247)

Schedule-7
(Relating to clause (3) of Articles 57, Article 109, clause (4) of
Article 162, and Article 197)
List of Concurrent Powers of Federation and State
S.N.

Matters

1.

Civil and criminal procedure, evidence and oaths
(legal recognition, public acts and records, and
judicial proceedings)

2.

Supply, distribution, price control, quality and
monitoring of essential goods and services

3.

Preventive detention for reasons connected with the
security of the country, prison and detention
management, and maintenance of peace and order

4.

Transfer of accused persons, detainees and prisoners
from one State to another State

5.

Laws relating to family affairs (marriage, transfer of
property, divorce, persons on the verge of extinction,
orphan, adoption, succession and joint family)

6.

Acquisition, requisitioning of property and creation of
right in property

7.

Contracts, cooperatives, partnership and agency
related matters

8.

Matters relating to bankruptcy and insolvency

9.

Drugs and pesticides

10.

Planning,
family
management

11.

Social security and employment, trade unions,

planning

(248)

and

population

settlement of industrial disputes, labour rights and
disputes related matters
12.

Legal profession, auditing, engineering, medicines,
Ayurvedic medicines, veterinary, Amchi and other
professions

13.

State boundary river, waterways,
protection, biological diversity

14.

Matters related to means of communication

15.

Industries and mines and physical infrastructures

16.

Casino, lottery

17.

Early preparedness for, rescue, relief and
rehabilitation from, natural and man made calamities

18.

Tourism, water supply and sanitation

19.

Motion pictures, cinema halls and sports

20.

Insurance business operation and management

21.

Poverty alleviation and industrialization

22.

Scientific research, science and technology and
human resources development

23.

Utilization of forests, mountains, forest conservation
areas and waters stretching in inter-State form

24.

Land policies and laws relating thereto

25.

Employment and unemployment benefit

(249)

environment

Schedule-8
(Relating to clause (4) of Article 57, clause (2) of Article 214,
clause (2) of Article 221 and clause (1) of Article 226)
List of Local Level Power
S.N.

Matters

1.

Town police

2.

Cooperative institutions

3.

Operation of F.M.

4.

Local taxes (wealth tax, house rent tax, land and building
registration fee, motor vehicle tax), service charge, fee,
tourism fee, advertisement tax, business tax, land tax
(land revenue), penalty, entertainment tax, land revenue
collection

5.

Management of the Local services

6.

Collection of local statistics and records

7.

Local level development plans and projects

8.

Basic and secondary education

9.

Basic health and sanitation

10.

Local market management, environment protection and
bio-diversity

11.

Local roads, rural roads, agro-roads, irrigation

12.

Management of Village Assembly, Municipal Assembly,
District Assembly, local courts, mediation and arbitration
(250)

13.

Local records management

14.

Distribution of house and land ownership certificates

15.

Agriculture and animal husbandry,
management, animal health, cooperatives

16.

Management of senior citizens, persons with disabilities
and the incapacitated

17.

Collection of statistics of the unemployed

18.

Management, operation and control of agricultural
extension

19.

Water supply, small hydropower projects, alternative
energy

20.

Disaster management

21.

Protection of watersheds, wildlife, mines and minerals

22.

Protection and development of languages, cultures and
fine arts

(251)

agro-products

Schedule-9
(Relating to clause (5) of Article 57, Article 109, clause (4) of
Article 162, Article 197, clause (2) of Article 214, clause (2) of
Article 221, and clause (1) of Article 226)
List of Concurrent Powers of Federation, State and Local Level
S.N.

Matters

1.

Cooperatives

2.

Education, health and newspapers

3.

Health

4.

Agriculture

5.

Services such as electricity, water supply, irrigation

6.

Service fee, charge, penalty and royalty from natural
resources, tourism fee

7.

Forests, wildlife, birds, water uses, environment,
ecology and bio-diversity

8.

Mines and minerals

9.

Disaster management

10.

Social security and poverty alleviation

11.

Personal events, births, deaths, marriages and statistics

12.

Archaeology, ancient monuments and museums

13.

Landless squatters management

14.

Royalty from natural resources

15.

Motor vehicle permits

(252)




Revised

The National Penal (Code) Act, 2017

Date of Authentication:
16 October 2017
Act number 36 of the year 2017
An Act Made To Amend And Consolidate Laws In Force Relating To
Criminal Offences
Preamble:
Whereas, it is expedient to provide for a timely code on criminal
offences, by amending and consolidating the laws in force relating to
criminal offences, in order to uphold morality, decency, etiquette,
convenience, economic interest of the public, by maintaining law and order
in the country, maintain harmonious relationship and peace among various
religious and cultural communities, and prevent and control criminal
offences;
Now, therefore, the Legislature-Parliament referred to in clause (1)
of Article 296 of the Constitution of Nepal has enacted this Act.
Part -1
General Provisions
Chapter-1
Preliminary
1.

Short title and commencement: (1) This Act may be cited as the
"National Penal (Code) Act, 2017".

1

(2)

It shall commence on 17 August 2018 (first day of the month

of Bhadra of the year 2075).
2.

Extra-territorial application of the Act: Any person who commits any
of the following offences outside Nepal shall be punished under this Act
as if he or she committed such offence in Nepal:
(a)

Any offence under Chapter 1 of Part 2 except Section
54,

(b)

Any offence under Chapter 17 of Part 2 committed by
kidnapping any person from Nepal,

(c)

Any offence under Sections 167, 276 and 279,

(d)

Any offence under Chapters 22 and 23 of Part 2
committed with intent to bring into use in or import into
Nepal,

(e)

Any offence under this Act committed in the course of
discharging duties of any position in the Government of
Nepal, State Government or Local Level or a body
corporate under full or majority ownership or control of
the Government of Nepal, State Government or Local
Level.

(2)

Any person who commits an offence under this Act on board

an aircraft or ship registered in Nepal while it is outside Nepal shall be
punished under this Act as if he or she committed the offence in Nepal.
(3)

Any Nepali citizen who commits any of the following

offences against a Nepali citizen outside Nepal shall be punished under this
Act as if he or she committed the offence in Nepal:

2

(a)

Murder, or attempt to, abetment of, or conspiracy to,
murder,

(b)

Abandonment of the helpless person,

(c)

Grievous hurt,

(d)

Kidnapping, hostage-taking or illegal detention,

(e)

Rape or incest,

(f)

Criminal mischief against the Government of Nepal,
State Government or Local Level or a body corporate
under full or majority ownership or control of the
Government of Nepal, State Government or Local
Level, extortion, criminal breach of trust, forgery, theft,
deception, robbery or criminal misappropriation of
property,

(g)

Offence under Section 158,

(h)

Offences relating to marriage under Chapter-11 of Part
2,

(i)

Food and drug adulteration with the intention of
importing into Nepal,

(j)

Offences relating to medical treatment under Sections
231, 232 and 233,

(k)
3.

Offence under Chapter-2 of Part 3.

Definitions: Unless the subject or the context otherwise requires, in
this Act,(a)

“court” means the Supreme Court, High Court or
District Court, and this term also includes a court, other

3

judicial body or authority authorized by law to proceed
and adjudicate any specific types of criminal offences,
(b)

“harbor” means supplying any person with food, drink,
shelter, money, in-kind, clothes, arms, ammunition or
means of transport, or helping or otherwise assisting any
person to evade apprehension,

(c)

“offence” means an act punishable by this Act or law,

(d)

“law” means law for the time being in force,

(e)

“act” means a series of acts, and this term also includes
omission to do an act required by law to be done or
commission of an act prohibited by law,

(f)

"grave offence" means an offence punishable by a
sentence of imprisonment for a term of more than three
but less than ten years,

(e)

"heinous offence" means an offence punishable by
imprisonment for life or for a term of more than ten
years,

(f)

"body" means the body of a human being,

(g)

“judge” means the authority of a court who proceeds,
hears and adjudicates a case, and this term also includes
any authority authorized to proceed, hear and adjudicate
any specific type of criminal cases,

(h)

“public servant” means any of the following persons:

4

(1)

a person elected, nominated or appointed to any
office with public accountability pursuant to the
Constitution or other law,

(2)

a person appointed to the service of the
Government of Nepal or State Government or any
other government service pursuant to law or a
contract,

(3)

a person elected, nominated or appointed to any
office of a Local Level or District Assembly or a
person appointed in any manner to the service of
such Level or District Assembly,

(4)

an office-bearer of a body corporate under full or
majority ownership or control of the Government
of Nepal, State Government or Local Level or a
person appointed to the service of such body, or

(5)

a person otherwise appointed to, or holding, any
office with public accountability.

(i)

“Local Level” means a Village Body (Gownpalika) or
Municipality,

(j)

“body corporate” means a body established by any law
or registered in accordance with law,

(k)

“Constitution” means the Constitution of Nepal,

(l)

“public document” means any of the following
documents:
(1) a document passed by the Legislature,

5

(2)

a document recording official acts performed by
the President pursuant to the Constitution,

(3)

a book, record or other document issued by the
Government of Nepal, State Government or Local
Level or offices under the Government of Nepal,
State

Government

or

Local

Level

or

Constitutional Body or office-bearer, court or
body established by an Act or Order, office of a
body corporate under full or majority ownership
or control of the Government of Nepal or
maintained in the archive of such offices,
(4)
4.

a judgment, decision or order made by a court.

Generally applicable principles and provisions: The principles
and provisions referred to in Chapters-2, 3, 4 and 5 of Part 1 of this
Act shall generally apply to the offences under this Act and other
Acts.

5.

Application of special Act: Where a special Act defines a specific
act as a separate offence and provides punishment for it, that Act
shall apply to such offence.

6

Chapter- 2
General Principles of Criminal Justice
6.

Lawful act not to be offence: No act required by law to be done or
excused by law shall be considered to be an offence.

7.

Not punishment except in accordance with law: No person shall
be liable to punishment for doing an act not punished by law nor
shall a person be subjected to punishment which is heavier than the
one prescribed by law in force when the offence was committed.

8.

Act done by mistake of fact not to be offence: No act done by a
person who is, or who by reason of a mistake of fact, in good faith
believes that he or she is bound by law to do that act or that such act
is excused by law shall be considered to be an offence.
Provided that no act done in ignorance of law shall be
excused.

9.

No punishment again for the same offense: No person shall be
prosecuted in a court and punished again for the same offence.

10.

No deprivation of fair trial: No person shall be deprived of fair trial
in proceedings by a competent court or judicial authority.

11.

No compulsion to testify against oneself: No person accused of an
offence shall be compelled to testify against himself or herself.

12.

Presumption of innocence until proven guilty: A person accused
of an offence shall be presumed innocent until proved guilty of that
offence.

13.

Act of a child not to be offence: No act done by a child below ten
years of age shall be considered to be an offence.

7

14.

Act of a person of unsound mind not to be offence: No act done
by a person who, at the time of doing it, by reason of unsoundness of
mind, is incapable of knowing the nature, characteristic, fault or
consequence of such act, shall be considered to be an offence.

15.

Act done by consent not to be offence: Except where done with the
intention of causing death or grievous hurt or with the knowledge
that it is likely to cause death or grievous hurt, no act done by a
person by obtaining consent of a person above eighteen years of age
which causes any harm to the person who has given such consent
shall be considered to be an offence.

16.

Act done for benefit by consent not to be offence: No act done by
a person in good faith and with due care for the benefit of another
person by consent of that other person which causes harm to that
person who has given such consent shall be considered to be an
offence.

17.

Act done for benefit by consent of guardian not to be offence: No
act done in good faith and with due care for the benefit of a person
below eighteen years of age, or of unsoundness of mind due to
mental illness, by his or her guardian or another person by consent of
the guardian, which causes harm to that person shall be considered to
be an offence.
Provided that except where done for the purpose of preventing
death or grievous hurt, no person who does an act with the
knowledge that it is likely to cause death or grievous hurt shall be
dispensed with criminal liability.

8

18.

Act done for benefit without consent not to be offence: Where any
act must be done immediately for the benefit of a person, and such
person is, for any reason, not in a position to give consent
immediately or has no guardian from whom it is possible to obtain
consent on such person's behalf immediately, such act done in good
faith and with due care for the benefit of that person without his or
her consent, which causes harm or injury to that person, shall not be
considered to be an offence.
Explanation: For the purposes of Sections 16 and 17, and this
Section, the term “benefit” does not mean:
(a)

a pecuniary benefit,

(b)

an act done with intent to cause death, or without any
reasonable cause, a grievous hurt.

19.

To be considered an offence even committed by consent:
Notwithstanding anything contained in Section 15,16 or 17, where
any act referred to in any of those Sections is considered to be
another offence under law, such act shall be considered to be an
offence even if it is done by consent.

20.

Consent: Consent may be expressed orally or in writing or by
gesture or conduct.
Provided that consent given in any of the following
circumstances shall not be considered to be consent:
(a)

Where the consent is given by a person under a
mistake of fact or fear or threat of any kind of
injury or harm and the doer of the act in

9

pursuance of such consent knows, or has reason
to believe, that the consent was so given,
(b)

Where the consent is given by a person who,
being of unsound mind due to mental illness, is
unable to understand characteristic, fault and
consequence of the consent given by him or her
when he or she was in a state of unsoundness of
mind,

(c)

Where the consent is given by a child below
eighteen years of age,

(d)

Where the consent is given under undue
influence.

21. Harm caused by communication made in good faith not to be
offence: No information or communication of any matter made in
good faith shall be considered to be an offence by reason of any harm
to the person to whom it is made, if it is made for the benefit of that
person.
22. Act compelled by fear, threat not to be offence: No act done by a
person who is compelled to do it by fear or threat exerted or made by
another person carrying a deadly weapon or toxic or explosive
substance that the other person would kill or cause grievous hurt to
that person or his or her close relative if that person does not do that
act immediately and there is a reasonable cause to apprehend that it
would cause death or grievous injury to that person or close relative if
such act is not done immediately shall be considered to be an offence.
Provided that such act shall be considered to be an offence if:

10

(a)

Death or grievous hurt is caused,

(b)

Rape is committed,

(c)

An offence against the State is committed, or

(d)

The doer of such act placed himself or herself in such
situation of fear or threat, of his or her own accord or as
a result of any thing done by himself or herself.

(2)

A person who causes the offence to be committed by

exerting fear or threat under sub-section (1) shall be punished by law
as if he or she committed the offence by himself or herself.
23.

Act done in good faith to prevent other harm, injury not to be
offence: Any act done by a person shall not be considered to be an
offence merely by reason of its being done with the knowledge that it
is likely to cause harm, injury, if it be done without any criminal
intent to cause harm, injury, and in good faith for the purpose of
preventing or avoiding possible great harm, injury to life, person or
property and it was so imminent that greater harm, injury than such
act was likely to result in would be caused to the life, person or
property of him or her or any one else if such act was not done
immediately.
24.

Act done for private defence not considered to be offence: (1)
Any act done in the exercise of the right of private defence subject to
this Chapter shall not be considered to be an offence.
(2)

Every person has a right to defend the body, life or

property of his or her own or of any other person against any illegal
harm.

11

(3)

The right of private defence under this Section shall be

exercised only when there is a reasonable apprehension or reasonable
cause to believe that the body, life or property of his or her own or of
any other person cannot be defended against any illegal harm unless
any act is done immediately.
25.

Restriction on the exercise of right of private defense: (1)
Notwithstanding anything contained in Section 24, the right of
private defense is not available in the following circumstances or
against the following acts:
(a) Where there is time to have or likely to have recourse
to the protection of public authority immediately to
defend the body or property of any one against illegal
harm at the time of causing such harm,
(b) Where harm caused to the body or property of a person
was so caused by reason that the harm doer was
provoked by such person himself or herself,
(c) Where a public servant does an act in good faith in
pursuance of a judgment or order of a court,
(d) Where a public servant does an act in good faith in the
exercise of his or her official power,
(e) Where any act is done by a person in pursuance of a
direction given in good faith by a public servant in the
exercise of his or her official power.
(2)

Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1),

a person shall not be deprived of the right of private defense in the
following circumstances:

12

(a) Where that person does not know or have a
reasonable reason to believe that the doer of the act
referred to in clause (c) of sub-section (1) is a public
servant and he or she is doing the act in pursuance of
the judgment or order of a court or the doer does not
disclose his or her identity or produce the authority
under which he or she acts even if so demanded,
(b) Where there is no reasonable reason to know or
believe that the doer of the act referred to in clause
(d) of sub-section (1) is a public servant,
(e) Where there is no reasonable reason to know or
believe that the doer of the act referred to in clause
(e) of sub-section (1) is doing such act by the
direction of a public servant or the doer does not
state that authority under which he or she acts or
does not produce the authority under which he or she
acts even if so demanded.
(3)

While exercising the right of private defence under

Section 24 or this Section, more force than reasonably necessary for
such defence cannot be used.
26.

No right to cause death: (1) In exercising the right of private
defence pursuant to this Chapter, no one shall have the right to cause
a person’s death.
(2)

Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1),

if any act done in the exercise of the right of private defence subject
to sub-section (3) of Section 25, in any of the following

13

circumstances, causes the death of a person, such act shall not be
considered to be an offence:
(a) Where there is reasonable cause to believe that an assault on
oneself or another person would cause the death of or
serious injury or grievous hurt to oneself or another person
unless instant defence is exercised against such assault,
(b) Where any act is instantly done by the victim having
reasonable cause to believe that the assault is made with the
intention of committing rape or at the time of or after the
commission of rape,
(c) Where hostage-taking or kidnapping is committed with the
intention of causing death, taking ransom for hostage-taking
or kidnapping, committing rape, causing grievous hurt,
(d) Where attempt is made to cause mischief by seizing, using a
deadly weapon, setting fire to or using explosive substance
on, any building, tent which is used for human dwelling or
as the place for worship or pray or the custody of property
or a means of transport,
(e) Where it is necessary to defend against robbery,
(f)

Where the circumstance requires an instant retaliation by a
security personnel deputed by order of the competent
authority for the personal security of a person or security of
a property of the Government of Nepal, State Government
or Local Level or a body corporate under full or majority
ownership or control of the Government of Nepal, State

14

Government or Local Level or public property in order to
prevent an assault made on such person or property.
27.

Act causing slight harm not to be offence: A slight harm not to be
complained of by a person of ordinary sense shall not be considered
to be an offence.

28.

Major liable to punishment for offence caused to be committed
by child: Where an offence is committed by a child upon being
lured, taught or influenced by a person to do so, such person shall be
liable to punishment as if the offence were committed by himself or
herself.

29.

Criminal intention not to be examined in strict liability offence:
In an offence which is a strict liability offence under this Act or the
law, there shall not be examined whether or not the offence was
committed intentionally.

30.

Criminal liability for offence committed by body corporate to be
vested on one who commits or causes the commission of the act:
Where any firm, company or body corporate commits, or causes the
commission of, an act considered to be an offence under this Act or
law, the person who committed, or caused the commission of, such
offence shall be responsible for such act; and where such person
cannot be identified, the concerned owners and partners who did
such act, in the case of a firm, the director, managing director,
general manager who did or caused the doing of such act, in the case
of a company or body corporate, and where even such person cannot
be identified, the chief executive of such body shall bear the criminal
liability.

15

31.

All members to be punished for offence committed by a group:
Where an offence is committed by a group of two or more persons,
all members of the group shall be liable to punishment for such
offence.

32.

Victim of crime to be entitled to obtain information of
proceedings of case and compensation: (1) The victim of crime
shall have the right to obtain information about the investigation and
proceedings of the case in which he or she is the victim.
(2)

The victim of crime shall have the right to justice with

social rehabilitation and compensation.

16

Chapter -3
Criminal Conspiracy, Attempt, Abetment and Accomplice
33. Prohibition of criminal conspiracy: (1) No person shall make a
criminal conspiracy.
(2)

Where two or more persons agree to commit, or cause

the commission of, an offence, and any act is done by only one or
two of them, they shall be considered to have committed a criminal
conspiracy.
(3)

A person who commits, or causes the commission of, a

criminal conspiracy to commit an offence of heinous or grave nature
shall, where no provision is made elsewhere in this Act for a separate
punishment for such conspiracy, be punished as follows:
(a)

Where the offence in pursuance of the criminal
conspiracy is committed, punishment imposable
if the offence had been committed,

(b)

Where another offence instead of the offence in
pursuance

of

the

criminal

conspiracy

is

committed and such other offence is committed in
the course of implementation of such conspiracy
or as probable consequence thereof, punishment
specified for that offence,
(c)

Where any offence in addition to the offence in
pursuance of the criminal conspiracy is also
committed and such offence is also committed in
the course of implementation of such conspiracy

17

or as a probable consequence thereof, additional
punishment also for such offence,
(d)

Where the offence of criminal conspiracy is yet to
be completed, one half of the punishment
specified for that offence.

34. Prohibition of attempt to commit offence: (1) No person shall make
attempt to commit an offence.
(2)

Even if it is impossible for an offence to be committed

for which attempt is made, attempt shall be considered to have been
committed.
(3)

Except as otherwise provided elsewhere in this Act, a

person who attempts, or causes attempt, to commit an offence shall
be punished with one half of the punishment specified for such
offence.
35. Prohibition of abetment: (1) No person shall abet another person to
commit an offence.
(2)

For the purposes of sub-section (1), where a person

instigates another person to commit an offence, the person is
considered to have abetted.
(3)

The abettor shall be liable to the separate punishment, if

any, provided for in this Act, and to the following punishment if such
separate punishment is not so provided for:
(a)

Where the offence is committed in pursuance of the
abetment, the punishment imposable as if he or she had
committed the offence,

18

(b)

Where the offence is yet to be committed in pursuance
of the abetment, one half of the punishment specified
for such offence.

(4)

Where an offence is abetted but a different offence is

committed by the abetted person, and that offence was committed
under the influence of the instigation or was a probable consequence of
the abetment, the abettor shall be liable to punishment as if he or she
had committed such offence as well.
36. Not to be accomplice: (1) No person shall become an accomplice to
any offence.
(2)

A person who, with the intention of committing an

offence, aids in the commission of such offence or other offence or
who hides the offender or helps the offender to escape after the
commission of the offence or who provides means to commit, or causes
the commission of, the offense or otherwise assists in the commission
of the offence shall be deemed to be an accomplice.
(3)

An accomplice shall be punished as follows:
(a)

A person who, with participation in a criminal
conspiracy, commits an offence, provides means
or place to commit the offence, or deprives the
person against whom the offence is committed of
the right of private defence or who orders or
advises to commit the offence, shall be punished
as if he or she had committed such offence,

(b)

For an accomplice other than one referred to in
clause (a), punishment not exceeding one half of

19

the punishment imposable for the commission of
such offence according to the degree of his or her
involvement in that act.
37.

Statute of limitation to be applicable: The statute of limitation
provided for in this Act for making a compliant in relation to an
offence shall also be applicable to the conspiracy, abetment,
accomplice of, or attempt to, such offence.

20

Chapter-4
Gravity of Offence Aggravating and Mitigating Factors
38.

Factors aggravating the gravity of offence: For the purposes of
this Act, the following factors, if exist, shall be considered as
aggravating the gravity of an offence:
(a)

The offence was committed against the President or
Head of Government or head of a foreign State,

(b)

The offence was committed in presence of the President
or Head of Government or head of a foreign State,

(c)

The offence was committed by the breach of trust,

(d)

The offence was committed by taking benefit of or
abusing a public office,

(e)

The offence was committed with the intention of
obstructing a person holding a public office in
discharging his or her official duty or to cause such
person to commit an illegal act,

(f)

The offence was committed in any government office,
public office or religious place,

(g)

The offence was committed by five or more persons
affiliated in a group,

(h)

The offence was committed by taking advantage of the
disturbance of public peace or landslide, flood,
earthquake or natural calamity of similar nature or
outbreak of epidemic, starvation or occurrence of any
other crisis of similar nature,

21

(i)

The offence was committed by carrying or using an arm
or toxic or explosive substance or supplying electricity
or using an electronic device or with the aid of a person
carrying an arm, toxic or explosive substance,

(j)

The offence was committed again by an offender
already sentenced to imprisonment,

(k)

The offence was committed by being allured of any
remuneration or assurance or benefit,

(l)

The offence was committed against a person under
one’s own protection or control or against the property
under one’s own custody,

(m)

The offence was committed by subjecting any one to
torture, cruel, inhumane or degrading treatment,

(n)

More than one offence were committed on a single
occasion,

(o)

The offence was committed against more than one
person on a single occasion,

(p)

The offence was committed by kidnapping any one or
taking any one hostage,

(q)

The offence was committed against a person under
detention, custody, imprisonment or control,

(r)

The offence was committed by one who has a duty to
provide security to any person against that person,

22

(s)

The offence was committed with the intention of
destroying the identity of any caste, race or group
(genocide),

(t)

The offence was committed with the intention of
causing hatred against any caste, race, religious or
cultural community,

(u)

The offence committed was a crime against humanity,

(v)

The offence was committed in a planned or organized
manner,

(w)

The offence was committed against an elderly person
above seventy-five years of age or a person being of
unsound mind by reason of physical or mental illness or
a person incapable of defending himself or herself
because of disability, or a child,

(x)

The offence was committed by a person deputed in
rescue work in cases of motor vehicle, aircraft accident
or natural calamity while being engaged in such rescue
work,

(y)

The offence was another offence committed by the same
offender against the person who had already become a
victim of an offence.

39.

Factors mitigating the gravity of offence: For the purposes of this
Act, the following factors, if exist, shall be considered as mitigating
the gravity of an offence:
(a) The offender is below eighteen years or above seventyfive years of age,

23

(b) The offender had no intention to commit the offence,
(c) The person against whom the offence was committed
had, immediately before the commission of the offence,
provoked or given threat to the offender,
(d) The offence was committed instantly as a retaliation
against any grave offence committed against the offender
or any of his or her close relatives,
(e) The offender voluntarily confessed the offence or
expressed a remorse therefor,
(f)

The offender surrendered himself or herself to the
concerned authority,

(g) The offender, having confessed the offence committed by
him or her, has already provided or agreed to pay
compensation to the victim,
(h) The offender has diminished capacity because of
physical, mental ability or disability,
(i)

The extent of loss or harm caused to the victim and the
society being insignificant,

(j)

The offender rendered assistance in judicial process by
telling the truth to the court,

(k) The offender has confessed the guilt and committed not
to commit any criminal offence in the future,
(l)

The offence was committed under other's instigation or
pressure.

24

Chapter-5
Provisions Relating to Punishment and Interim Relief
40.

Types of punishment: (1) The punishments for the offences set
forth in this Act shall be as follows:
(a)

Imprisonment for life,

(b)

Imprisonment,

(c)

Fine,

(d)

Imprisonment and fine,

(e)

Compensation,

(f)

Imprisonment for the failure to pay a fine or
compensation,

(g)
(2)

Community service in lieu of imprisonment.
Where any law provides for the sentence of confiscation

of property for any offence, such sentence of confiscation shall not
be imposed for that offence, after the commencement of this Act.
(3)

Notwithstanding anything contained in this Section, no

sentence of fine of less than one rupee and of imprisonment for a
term of less than one day shall be imposed.
41.

Imprisonment for life: Notwithstanding anything contained
elsewhere in this Act, in imposing a sentence of imprisonment on an
offender for the following offence, the offender shall be subjected to
imprisonment for the whole of his or her natural life:
(a) Murder with cruelty, torture or inhumane conduct,
(b) Murder by hijacking or exploding an aircraft,

25

(c) Murder by kidnapping or taking hostage,
(d) Murder by poisoning publicly consumable beverages
or food,
(e) Genocide (destroying the identity of any caste, race or
group) or offence committed with the objective of
committing genocide,
(f) Murder with rape.
42.

Computation of imprisonment for life: Except in the circumstance
referred to in Section 41, the sentence of imprisonment for life shall
be so computed that its term is twenty-five years.

43.

One and half punishment for consolidated/integrated offence: (1)
Where a person, at the time of judgment by a court, is convicted of
more than one offence on a single occasion or different offences on
different occasions, such person shall be deemed to have committed
a consolidated offence.
(2)

The offender who commits a consolidated offence

referred to in sub-section (1) shall be sentenced for the offence
punishable by the maximum punishment and to additional
punishment of one half of that punishment specified for such
offence.
44.

Additional punishment for offender of heinous crime and
recidivist: (1) If a person who was sentenced for any offence
commits another heinous or grave offence before the expiry of a
period of five years after the date on which he or she completed the
service of that sentence or was granted pardon, he or she shall be
considered to be a recidivist.

26

(2)

A recidivist shall be liable to a punishment that is up to

double the punishment imposable for the last offence committed by
him or her.
Provided that this Section shall not apply to an offender who
has been sentenced to imprisonment for life pursuant to Section 41.
45.

Punishment imposable on children: (1) A person who commits an
act constituting an offence under the law shall not be liable to any
punishment if that person has not attained ten years of age at the time
of the commission of such act.
(2)

In imposing the punishment of imprisonment on a

person who is ten years of age or above ten but below fourteen years
of age, such person may be sentenced to imprisonment for a
maximum of six months or sent to a reform home for a maximum of
one year in lieu of such imprisonment.
(3)

Where a person who is fourteen years of age or above

fourteen but below sixteen years of age commits any offence
punishable by imprisonment, such person shall be liable to half the
punishment imposable by law on a person who has attained majority.
(4)

Where a person who is sixteen years of age or above

sixteen but below eighteen years of age commits any offence
punishable by imprisonment, such person shall be liable to twothirds of the punishment imposable by law on a person who has
attained majority.
46.

Imprisonment for fine: (1) Any offender who is unable to pay a
fine imposed on him or her may be subjected to imprisonment.

27

(2)

The term of imprisonment under sub-section (1) shall be

determined as follows:
(a)

In determining the sentence of imprisonment in
default of payment of a fine for an offence
punishable by both imprisonment and fine, the
term of imprisonment shall be so determined as
not to exceed ten years.

(b)

Where an offence is punishable by either
imprisonment or fine or with both, in which the
offender is sentenced to a fine only, in
determining the sentence of imprisonment in
default of payment of such fine, the term of
imprisonment shall be so determined as not to
exceed one half of the maximum term of
imprisonment that can be imposed for such
offence,

(c)

Where an offence is punishable by fine only, in
which the offender is sentenced to a fine, in
determining the sentence of imprisonment in
default of payment of such fine, the term of
imprisonment shall be so determined as not to
exceed two years.

(3)

Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (2),

the following provisions shall apply to the imposition of a sentence
of imprisonment for non-payment of a fine on a child below eighteen
years of age:

28

(a)

In the event of non-payment of a fine for an
offence punishable by fine only or by either fine
or imprisonment, the child shall not be subjected
to imprisonment and the fine shall be remitted.

(b)

Where an offence is punishable by imprisonment
or fine or both, in which the offender is sentenced
to a fine only, in determining the sentence of
imprisonment in default of payment of such fine,
the term of imprisonment shall be so determined
as not to exceed three months.

(c)

In determining the sentence of imprisonment
pursuant to sub-section (2) to be imposed on a
person who is above fourteen but below eighteen
years of age, the term of imprisonment shall be so
determined as not to exceed half the sentence of
imprisonment imposable on a person above
eighteen years of age.

47.

Remission of sentence: (1) Where any offender, upon having
confessed the offence committed by him or her, has assisted in the
collection of evidence, apprehension of other accused person or gang
or accomplice thereof, in relation to such offence or assisted the
investigating or prosecuting authority or the court, a maximum of
fifty percent of the sentence imposable under law for such offence
may be remitted.
(2)

Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1),

the following offender shall not be entitled to the remission of
sentence:

29

(a)

One who has once obtained remission under subsection (1),

(b)

One who has been convicted of any offence
punishable by imprisonment, and a period of
three years has not lapsed since the completion of
service of the sentence of imprisonment,

(c)

One who has once been sentenced for any offence
of the same nature as in which the remission of
sentence is sought.

(3)

In granting a remission of punishment pursuant to sub-

section (1), regard shall be had to, inter alia, at which stage of
investigation or trial the accused has confessed the offence and in
what circumstances he or she has made such confession.
48.

Power

of

court

to

order

interim

compensation:

(1)

Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this Act, where it
is necessary to immediately provide medical treatment or
compensation or any type of relief amount to a person who has
become victim of an offence in consequence of its commission or a
person who is dependent on him or her, the court may order the
person accused of such offence to provide medical treatment or pay
an interim compensation or relief amount to such person.
(2)

Where an order is made pursuant to sub-section (1), the

person so accused shall immediately provide such compensation or
amount to the victim or person dependent on him or her.
(3)

Where

the

accused

is

unable

to

provide

the

compensation or amount pursuant to sub-section (2) in accordance

30

with the order referred to in sub-section (1), the court shall order that
the compensation or amount be provided to the victim or person
dependent on him or her from the victim relief fund established
pursuant to the laws in force related to the determination and
execution of sentences for criminal offences, and the amount so
provided shall be recovered from such accused person and
reimbursed into such fund.
(4)

Where a person who has paid compensation or relief

amount pursuant to this Section is acquitted of the charge by the
judgment of the court, the person who has received such
compensation or relief amount shall, within thirty-five days of such
acquittal, return such amount to such person or to the victim relief
fund referred to in sub-section (3).
(5)

Where such person does not return such amount within

the period referred to in sub-section (4), the court shall cause such
amount to be recovered from any assets of such person within thirtyfive days of such acquittal.

31

Part-2
Criminal Offences
Chapter-1
Offences against the State
49.

Prohibition of undermining sovereignty, integrity or national
unity: (1) No person shall, with the intention of undermining the
independence, sovereignty, geographical or territorial integrity or
national unity of Nepal, collect persons, arms and ammunitions,
build any armed military or paramilitary organization or attempt to
commit such act.
(2)

No person shall make, or cause to be made, any kind of

conspiracy, in association with any foreign state, government or
organized force, to undermine the independence, sovereignty,
geographical or territorial integrity or national unity of Nepal.
(3)

No person shall abet the commission of the offence

under sub-section (1) or (2).
(4)

No person shall commit, or cause to be committed, any

act that gives rise to hatred, enmity or contempt on grounds of class,
race, religion, region, community or similar other ground, which is
likely to jeopardize the sovereignty, geographical or territorial
integrity, nationality, national unity, independence, dignity, or
harmonious relations between federal units, of Nepal or attempt to
commit, or abet the commission of, or make conspiracy to commit,
such act, or undermine or cause to be undermined the cordial
relations subsisting between different castes, races or communities.

32

(5)

A person who commits, or causes to be committed, the

offence referred to in this Section shall be sentenced to the following
punishment:
(a)

Imprisonment for life in the case of the offence referred
to in sub-section (1) or (2),

(b)

Imprisonment for a term not exceeding ten years and a
fine not exceeding one hundred thousand rupees in the
case of the offence referred to in sub-section (3),

(c)

Imprisonment for a term not exceeding five years and a
fine not exceeding fifty thousand rupees in the case of
the offence referred to in sub-section (4).

50.

Sedition: (1) No person shall, with the intention of overthrowing the
Government of Nepal or the constitutional structure, create any kind
of disorder by demonstrating or using military, paramilitary or
criminal force or form an armed military or paramilitary organization
or make conspiracy, attempt or incitement to commit such act.
(2)

A person who commits the offence referred to in sub-

section (1) shall be liable to punishment with imprisonment for a
term not exceeding twenty-five years.
(3)

No person shall, by words, either spoken or written or

by figure or signs or otherwise, showing any baseless or
unsubstantiated matter in relation to the Government of Nepal or any
action of the Government of Nepal, bring or attempt to bring into
hatred, enmity or contempt towards the Government of Nepal or
cause the commission of such act.

33

Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall be
considered to render any healthy or decent criticism of the
Government of Nepal to be the offence.
(4)

A person who commits the offence referred to in sub-

section (3) shall be liable to the sentence of imprisonment for a term
not exceeding three years or a fine not exceeding thirty thousand
rupees.
51.

Prohibition of act against national interest: (1) No one shall do, or
cause to be done, any act against national interest.
(2)

For the purposes of sub-section (1), where any person

does, or causes to be done, any of the following acts, he or she shall
be considered to have done an act against national interest:
(a)

To dishonor or degrade or spread hatred or
enmity

against

the

freedom,

sovereignty,

geographical or territorial integrity, nationality,
independence, self-esteem of, or international
image of, Nepal,
(b)

To encroach the international boundary of Nepal,
or remove or dislocate any boundary pillar,
except in accordance with agreement with a
neighbouring country, or to so change any
boundary pillar as to be prejudicial to the
geographical or territorial integrity of Nepal.

(3)

Any Nepali player or a group of Nepali players, who

representing Nepal, plays any match in competition with any player
or players in Nepal or a foreign country shall not play, or cause to be

34

played, such match in connivance with or under the influence of any
one in a manner to manipulate a natural result of such match or to
make a bet win or lose, and where any match has been so played,
the offence against national interest shall be considered to have been
committed.
(4)

Any person who commits the offence referred to in sub-

section (2) or (3) shall be liable to the following punishment:
(a)

A sentence of imprisonment for a term not
exceeding five years and fine not exceeding fifty
thousand rupees, in the case of the offence
referred to in sub-section (2),

(b)

A sentence of imprisonment for a term not
exceeding three years and fine not exceeding
thirty thousand rupees, in the case of the offence
referred to in sub-section (3).

(5)

Where any person has transacted money in the course of

the commission of the offence referred to in sub-section (2) or (3),
the amount of money so transacted shall be forfeited, in addition to
the punishment pursuant to sub-section (4).
(6)

Any person who orders, directs, abets, incites or

facilitates the commission of the offence referred to in sub-section
(3) shall be liable to punishment as if that person were the principal
offender.
(7)

Where the offence referred to in sub-section (2) or (3) is

committed by a public office holder or a person representing Nepal,

35

while in a foreign country, he or she shall be liable to additional
sentence of imprisonment for a term not exceeding three years.
52.

Prohibition of genocide: (1) No person shall commit, or cause to be
committed, genocide.
(2)

For the purpose of sub-section (1), any of the following

acts committed with intent to destroy, in whole or in part, an
ethnical, racial, national or religious group, or any attempt or
conspiracy to commit such act, shall be considered to be the offence
of genocide:
(a)

Mass killing of members of such group, in a
planned way, at one or several times,

(b)

Causing grievous hurt to the body of, or causing
serious bodily or mental harm to, members of
such group, in a planned way, at one or several
times,

(c)

Deliberately inflicting on the group conditions of
life, inter alia, the depriving its members of
access to essential goods such as water, food, fuel
and medicine, by hindering the supply or
movement of such goods, thereby deliberately
making painful the life of members of such
group, calculated to bring about its physical
destruction in whole or in part,

(d)

Forcibly imposing measures on members of such
group intended to prevent births within the group,

36

except in cases of voluntary use by such members
of family planning means,
(e)

Forcibly transferring children of such group to
another group.

(3)

Any person who commits the offence referred to in sub-

section (1) shall be liable to the following punishment:
(a)

Imprisonment for life, in the case of the offence
referred to in clause (a),

(b)

Imprisonment for a term not exceeding five years
and fine not exceeding fifty thousand rupees, in
addition to the sentence imposable under this Act
for grievous hurt or hurt to human body, in the
case of the offence referred to in clause (b),

(c)

Imprisonment for a term not exceeding ten years,
in the case of the offence referred to in clause (c),
(d) or (e).

(4)

Where the offence referred to in this Section is

committed in pursuance of order or direction given by a person or
group, whether organized or unorganized, the person, or the
responsible person or persons of such group giving such order or
direction shall be liable as the principal offender.
(5)

Where the offence referred to in this Section has been

committed by a group or with the involvement of several persons,
every person involved in such offence shall be equally liable as the
offender.

37

(6)

Where any person who commits the offence referred to

in this Section is a public office holder, he or she shall not be
allowed to make a plea that such offence has been committed in the
course of executing a superior order or maintaining law and order or
enforcing law, and that person shall not enjoy any remission or
waiver from sentence on the ground that he or she has made such
plea.
53.

Prohibition of waging war against Nepal or assist the army of a
State at war with Nepal: (1) No person shall wage or declare to
wage war against Nepal, by raising arms, or attempt or threat to
wage such war, or collect arms, ammunition or form a military or
paramilitary organization with intent to wage war against Nepal.
(2)

No person shall, in any situation whether a state of war

is declared or not, supply any kind of strategic or military
information or otherwise render assistance to any foreign army
engaged in war with Nepal or attempt to do so.
(3)

Where a declaration is made by the Government of

Nepal prohibiting the making of relation or transaction with a State
engaged in war with Nepal, any citizen or corporate body of such
State or the importing or obtaining of any goods or services of such
State, no person shall make such relation or transaction with such
State, citizen or body or import or obtain such goods or services.
(4)

A person who commits, or causes to be committed, the

offence referred to in sub-section (1) or (2) shall be liable to a
sentence of imprisonment for life, and a person who commits the
offence referred to in sub-section (3) shall be liable to a sentence of

38

imprisonment for a term not exceeding twenty-five years and a fine
not exceeding one hundred thousand rupees.
54.

Prohibition of waging war or insurrection against friendly State:
(1) No person shall, using the territory of Nepal, wage or threaten to
wage war, by raising arms, or attempt to wage such war or insurrect
or attempt to insurrect against a State having diplomatic relations
with Nepal.
(2)

A person who commits, or causes to be committed, the

offence referred to in sub-section (1) shall be liable to a sentence of
imprisonment for a term not exceeding seven years and a fine not
exceeding seventy thousand rupees.
55.

Prohibition of giving provocation to army or police: (1) No
person shall abet or give provocation to the desertion of a soldier,
police or armed police personnel or officer in the Nepal Army, Nepal
Police or Armed Police Force, Nepal from the Nepal Army, Nepal
Police or Armed Police Force, Nepal or abet the breach of discipline
by such soldier, police or armed police personnel or attempt to
seduce such soldier, police or armed police personnel from his or her
duty, or, knowing or having reason to believe that a soldier, police or
armed police personnel has so deserted the Army or Police or Force,
harbor such deserter.
(2)

A person who commits, or causes to be

committed the offence referred to in sub-section (1) shall be liable to
a sentence of imprisonment for a term not exceeding ten years and a
fine not exceeding one hundred thousand rupees.

39

56.

Prohibition of espionage: (1) No person shall, with intent to
undermine the sovereignty, security or geographical or territorial
integrity of Nepal or to prejudice the interests of Nepal or with the
knowledge that such consequence is likely, or being induced by any
foreign country or international organization, supply to any one any
information relating to the military situation, strategic arrangement
or internal security of Nepal or relating to any matter that must be
kept confidential by the Government of Nepal from the political,
economic or diplomatic viewpoint or confidential document, or any
matter that is confidential or must be kept confidential under law or
conspire or attempt to commit, or abet the commission of, such act or
do any other act with intent to supply such information, and a person
who commits such act shall be considered to have committed
espionage.
(2)

A person who commits, or causes to be committed,

espionage referred to in sub-section (1) shall be liable to punishment
as follows:
(a)

In the case of a person who commits, or causes to be
committed, espionage in relation to any matter of
military situation, strategic arrangement or internal
security of Nepal, a sentence of imprisonment for a term
not exceeding twenty-five years,

(a) In the case of a person who commits, or causes to be
committed, espionage in relation to any matter that must
be kept confidential by the Government of Nepal from
the political, economic or diplomatic viewpoint or any
other confidential document, that must be kept

40

confidential by the Government of Nepal from the
political, economic or diplomatic viewpoint or any other
confidential document, a sentence of imprisonment for a
term ranging from five to ten years,
(c) In the case of a person who commits, or causes to be
committed, espionage in relation to any matter other
than that set forth in clauses (a) and (b), a sentence of
imprisonment for a term not exceeding five years and a
fine of fifty thousand rupees,
(d) In the case of a person who, despite the knowledge that
any one is going to commit espionage, does not give
information thereof to the Government of Nepal, a
sentence of imprisonment for a term not exceeding one
year and a fine of one hundred thousand rupees.
57.

Prohibition of assault on President: (1) No person shall assassinate
or attempt to assassinate the President of Nepal.
(2)

No person shall, in any manner, abduct, or cause to be

abducted, the President of Nepal or take, or cause to be taken, him or
her hostage.
(3)

No person shall, in any manner, assault, or cause to be

assaulted, the President of Nepal.
(4)

A person who commits any offence referred to in this

Section shall be liable to punishment as follows:
(a)

In the case of the offence referred to in subsection (1), a sentence of imprisonment for life,

41

(b)

In the case of the offence referred to in subsection (2), a sentence of imprisonment for a term
ranging from ten to fifteen years,

(c)

In the case of the offence referred to in subsection (3), a sentence of imprisonment for a term
ranging from five to ten years.

58.

Prohibition of intimidation of President or Parliament: (1) No
person shall intimidate, whether by using any kind of force or not,
show fear or terror to, or otherwise overawe the President or
Parliament of Nepal with intent to prevent or restrain the President or
Parliament of Nepal from performing any of the functions required
to be performed pursuant to the Constitution or law or compel the
President or Parliament of Nepal to perform the functions in any
specific manner.
(2)

A person who commits, or causes to be committed, the

offence referred to in sub-section (1) shall be liable to a sentence of
imprisonment for a term not exceeding seven years or a fine not
exceeding seventy thousand rupees or with both.
Explanation: For the purposes of this Section, the term
"Parliament" means the Federal Parliament and the State Assembly
under the Constitution of Nepal, and this term also includes the
Legislature-Parliament.
59.

Statute of limitation: (1) No statute of limitation shall apply to a
complaint with regard to any of the offences under Sections 49, 50,
51 52, 53 and 57.

42

(2)

In the case of the offences under the Sections of this

Chapter, except those Sections set forth in sub-section (1), no
complaint shall be entertained after the expiry of two years of the
date of knowledge of the commission of the offence.

43

Chapter-2
Offences against Public Tranquility
60.

Prohibition of unlawful assembly: (1) No person shall be engaged
in an unlawful assembly.
(2)

An assembly of five or more persons with the objective

of doing any of the following acts shall be considered to be an
unlawful assembly:
(a)

By means of force or show of force or show of a
deadly weapon:
(1)

to prevent any public servant from
exercising the lawful functions or duties,

(2)

to take or obtain possession of anyone’s
property,

(3)

to deprive any person of the enjoyment of
the right of way, use of water, public
transport or communication or similar
other utilities,

(4)

to compel any person to do what he or she
is not legally bound to do or to omit to do
what he or she is legally entitled to do.

(b)

To hinder, resist the execution of any law, or of any
legal process,

(c)

To commit any offence punishable by a sentence of
imprisonment.

44

(3)

Any person who, with the knowledge that it is an

unlawful assembly, joins the assembly shall be liable to a sentence of
imprisonment for a term not exceeding six months and a fine not
exceeding five thousand rupees where he or she has joined it without
arms, and imprisonment for a term not exceeding one year and a fine
not exceeding ten thousand rupees where he or she has joined it with
arms.
(4)

Any person who himself or herself does not join an

unlawful assembly but hires or otherwise induces or overawes
another to join such assembly shall be liable to the sentence referred
to in sub-section (3) as if he or she himself or herself had joined such
unlawful assembly.
61.

Prohibition of breach of order issued to prevent or disperse
unlawful assembly: (1) Where a competent authority makes an
order to prevent or disperse an unlawful assembly, no person shall
participate or continue in such assembly.
(2)

A person who continues in, participates in, or joins an

unlawful assembly under sub-section (1) shall be liable to a sentence
of imprisonment for a term not exceeding one year or a fine not
exceeding ten thousand rupees or with both.
62.

Every member to be considered to have committed offence:
Where any member of an unlawful assembly commits any offence in
the achievement of the object of such assembly, every member of
such assembly who aids and assists knowingly at the time of the
commission of offence shall be considered to have committed the
offence.

45

63.

Prohibition of rioting: (1) No person shall commit, or cause to be
committed, the offence of rioting.
(2)

Where an unlawful assembly or a member thereof uses

force or destroys, damages or causes loss to any public or private
property in the course of achievement of the object of such assembly,
every member of such assembly shall be considered to have
committed the offence of rioting.
(3)

Every person who commits the offense referred to in

sub-section (1) shall be liable to a sentence of imprisonment for a
term not exceeding two years and a fine not exceeding twenty
thousand rupees if he or she is armed with a deadly weapon, and to a
sentence of imprisonment for a term not exceeding one year and a
fine not exceeding ten thousand rupees if he or she is not armed with
a deadly weapon.
64.

Prohibition of abetting rioting: (1) No person shall, with intent to
cause the commission of rioting or with the knowledge that rioting is
likely to be committed, abet the commission of rioting by another
person.
(2)

A person who abets under sub-section (1) shall be liable

to a sentence of imprisonment for a term not exceeding one year, if
the offence of rioting is committed, and to a sentence of
imprisonment for a term not exceeding six months, if the offence of
rioting is not committed, or to a fine not exceeding five thousand
rupees or the both sentences.
65.

Prohibition of acts prejudicial to public tranquility: (1) No
person, by words, either spoken or written or by signs or otherwise

46

shall do any act which, on the ground of religion, color, caste, race,
community or language, is prejudicial to harmonious relationship
between peoples of different classes, regions or communities of
Nepal.
(2)

A person who commits, or causes to be committed, the

offence referred to in sub-section (1) shall be liable to a sentence of
imprisonment for a term not exceeding one year and a fine not
exceeding ten thousand rupees.
(3)

A person who commits the offence referred to in sub-

section (1) in any shrine, deity place, place of worship or pray or in
any assembly engaged in the performance of a religious or cultural
festival or ceremony shall be liable to an additional sentence of
imprisonment for a term not exceeding one year, in addition to the
sentence referred to in sub-section (2).
66.

Prohibition of obstructing public servant: (1) No person shall
obstruct or attempt to obstruct any public official in the discharge of
his or her duty in endeavoring to prevent or disperse an unlawful
assembly or to suppress a riot.
(2)

A person who commits, or causes to be committed, the

offence referred to in sub-section (1) shall be liable to a sentence of
imprisonment for a term not exceeding one year or a fine not
exceeding ten thousand rupees or both sentences.
67.

Prohibition of obstructing movement in public place: (1) No
person, by show of any kind of fear or terror, shall close the
operation of a public road, way, rope-way, cable-car, airport,
railway, water transportation route, postal and other public service,

47

or obstruct, in any way, the movement of pedestrians, motor vehicles
or animals by obstructing, in any way, a public road, way, rope-way,
cable-car way, airport, railway or water transportation route or
impede or obstruct, in any way, any person in entering into any
public place except in accordance with the order of a competent
authority under a law.
(2)

A person who commits, or causes to be committed, the

offence under sub-section (1) shall be liable to a sentence of
imprisonment for a term not exceeding three years or a fine not
exceeding thirty thousand rupees or both the sentences.
68.

Prohibition of obstructing public services: (1) No person shall, by
show of any kind of fear or threat, close, or obstruct, in any way, the
operation of public electricity, telecommunication or other public
services of similar nature or public service specified in law.
(2)

A person who commits, or causes to be committed, the

offence referred to in sub-section (1) shall be liable to a sentence of
imprisonment for a term not exceeding three years or a fine not
exceeding thirty thousand rupees.
69.

Prohibition of violating curfew: (1) No person shall knowingly
violate a curfew order imposed by a competent authority under law
to prevent an unlawful assembly, riot or any other act that breaches
tranquility.
(2)

A person who commits the offence referred to in sub-

section (1) shall be liable to a sentence of imprisonment for a term
not exceeding one year or a fine not exceeding ten thousand rupees
or both the sentences.

48

70.

Not to spread rumor: (1) No person shall, with intent to breach
public tranquility, commit rioting or undermine or jeopardize the
sovereignty, geographical or territorial integrity of Nepal or
harmonious relation between different races, castes or communities,
spread or propagate rumors or hold a procession with slogans, in a
manner to provoke any one.
(2)

Any person who commits, or causes to be committed,

the offence referred to in sub-section (1) shall be liable to a sentence
of imprisonment for a term not exceeding one year or a fine not
exceeding ten thousand rupees or both the sentences.
71.

Prohibition of providing house, land or vehicle for breaching
peace: No person, knowingly or having a reasonable reason to know
that another person is going to breach public peace or commit
rioting, shall provide his or her house, land, vehicle or arm to that
other person.
(2)

Any person who commits, or causes to be committed,

the offence referred to in sub-section (1) shall be liable to a sentence
of imprisonment for a term not exceeding six months or a fine not
exceeding five thousand rupees or both the sentences.
72.

Prohibition of holding tourch procession in sensitive public area:
(1) No person shall, with intent to breach public peace, hold any
tourch procession or assembly or procession carrying a fire or
inflammable substance in any place specified as the sensitive public
area by order of the competent authority in view of the sovereignty,
geographical or territorial integrity, security of Nepal or pubic
tranquility or decency.

49

(2)

A person who commits the offence referred to in sub-

section (1) shall be liable to a sentence of imprisonment for a term
not exceeding six months or a fine not exceeding five thousand
rupees or both the sentences.
73.

Prohibition of destroying or damaging essential commodities: (1)
No person shall, having committed any offence under this Chapter,
destroy, damage or set on fire, or cause to be done so, any
commodity which is regarded as an essential commodity under the
law or public or private property or disorder such commodity or
property by himself or herself or cause it to be disordered by another
person, steal such commodity or property or knowingly buy or sell,
or cause to be bought or sold, any commodity obtained by theft.
(2)

A person who commits the offence referred to in sub-

section (1) shall be liable to an additional sentence of imprisonment
for a term not exceeding one year or a fine not exceeding ten
thousand rupees or both the sentences, in addition to the sentence
imposable for any offence referred to in this Chapter.
(3)

Where such commodity or property has already been

destroyed or damaged from the offence referred to in sub-section (1),
a compensation equal to the claimed amount shall also be recovered
from such person.
(4)

Where the person who has committed the offence

referred to in sub-section (1) is identified, such person, and where
such person is not so identified, the person who induces or orders the
commission of such act shall be considered to have committed the
offence.

50

74.

Statute of limitation: No complaint on an offence under this
Chapter shall lie after the lapse of three months from the date of
commission of such offence.

51

Chapter-3
Offences Relating to Contempt of Authority of Public Servants
75.

Prohibition of obstructing the service of summons, process etc.:
(1) No person shall obstruct in or object to, or cause to be done so,
the service of a summons, process, arrest warrant, notice or order
issued under a law or the making of search, seizure, survey,
measurement or public inquiry or arresting any person in pursuance
of a warrant.
(2)

A person who commits the offence referred to in sub-

section (1) shall be liable to a sentence of imprisonment for a term
not exceeding six months or a fine not exceeding five thousand
rupees or both the sentences.
(3)

Where a public servant commits the offence referred to

in sub-section (1), he or she shall be liable to an additional sentence
of imprisonment for a term not exceeding three months.
76.

Prohibition of refusing to receive and returning summons,
process, notice or order: (1) Where a person in whose name a
summons, process, notice, arrest warrant or order has been issued
under law is tendered for the service thereof on him or her, such
person shall, with mala fide intention, not refuse to receive, and
return, such summons, process, notice or arrest warrant.
(2)

A person who commits the offence referred to in sub-

section (1) shall be liable to a sentence of imprisonment for a term
not exceeding three months or a fine not exceeding five thousand
rupees or both the sentences.

52

77.

Prohibition of absconding to avoid service of summons, process,
notice or order: (1) No person, being legally bound to receive a
summons, process, notice, arrest warrant or order issued by the
competent authority, shall abscond, with mala fide intention to avoid
being served with such summons, process, notice, arrest warrant or
order.
(2)

A person who commits the offence referred to in sub-

section (1) shall be liable to a sentence of imprisonment for a term
not exceeding three months or a fine not exceeding five thousand
rupees or both the sentences.
78.

Prohibition of tearing out or removing summons, process etc.:
(1) No person shall, with mala fide intention, tear out or remove a
summons, process, arrest warrant, notice or order affixed to a place
in accordance with law, until its purpose is served.
(2)

A person who commits, or causes to be committed, the

offence referred to in sub-section (1) shall be liable to a sentence of
imprisonment for a term not exceeding six months or a fine not
exceeding five thousand rupees or both the sentences.
79.

Prohibition of serving process in a false manner: (1) No person
who is legally bound to serve, or cause to be served, a process shall
serve the process in a false manner.
(2)

A person who commits the offence referred to in sub-

section (1) shall be liable to a sentence of imprisonment for a term
not exceeding one year or a fine not exceeding ten thousand rupees
or both the sentences.

53

80.

Prohibition of omission to produce document: (1) No person who
is legally bound to produce or deliver up any document to any office,
court or public servant under law shall omit so to produce or deliver
up such document.
(2)

A person who commits the offence referred to in sub-

section (1) shall be liable to a sentence of imprisonment for a term
not exceeding six months or a fine not exceeding five thousand
rupees or both the sentences.
81.

Prohibition of making false statement by person under oath: (1)
A person who is bound by law or by an oath to state the truth on any
subject to any competent authority or is a public office holder upon
taking oath under law shall not, in that capacity, state any false
statement.
(2)

A person who commits the offence referred to in sub-

section (1) shall be liable to a sentence of imprisonment for a term
not exceeding two years or a fine not exceeding twenty thousand
rupees or both the sentences.
82.

Prohibition of refusing oath: (1) No person who is present before
the competent authority to state the truth on any subject shall refuse
to take an oath to state the truth on such subject when so required to
take such oath.
(2)

A person who commits the offence referred to in sub-

section (1) shall be liable to a sentence of imprisonment for a term
not exceeding three months or a fine not exceeding five thousand
rupees or both the sentences.

54

83.

Prohibition of refusing to answer: (1) No person who is under a
legal duty to state the truth on any subject to a competent authority
shall refuse to answer any question demanded of him or her on such
subject by such authority.
Provided that no person shall be compelled to testify against
himself or herself.
(2)

A person who commits the offence referred to in sub-

section (1) shall be liable to a sentence of imprisonment for a term
not exceeding six months or a fine not exceeding five thousand
rupees or both the sentences.
84.

Prohibition of giving false information: (1) No person shall give
any false information to any one, with intent to prevent any public
servant from doing any act which he or she is bound by law to do or
to cause such public servant to do anything which he or she need not
or ought not to do.
(2)

A person who commits the offence referred to in sub-

section (1) shall be liable to a sentence of imprisonment for a term
not exceeding one year or a fine not exceeding ten thousand rupees
or both the sentences.
85.

Prohibition of obstructing: (1) No person shall, by way of
intimidation or force or in any other way, obstruct or hinder any
public servant, who is discharging his or her public duties, in the
discharge of such duties.
(2)

No person shall knowingly obstruct or hinder the

process of forfeiture, collection of records, withholding, auction or
sale of any property being carried out in accordance with law.

55

(3)

A person who commits the offence referred to in sub-

section (1) or (2) shall be liable to a sentence of imprisonment for a
term not exceeding one year or a fine not exceeding ten thousand
rupees or both the sentences.
86.

Prohibition of refusing to render assistance to public servant: (1)
No person under a legal duty to render assistance to a public servant
in the execution of his or her public duty shall refuse to so render
such assistance.
(2)

A person who commits the offence referred to in sub-

section (1) shall be liable to a sentence of imprisonment for a term
not exceeding six months or a fine not exceeding five thousand
rupees or both the sentences.
87.

Prohibition of disobedience to order: (1) No person shall disobey
an order made by a competent authority in accordance with law, by
omitting to do anything ought to be done under law or doing
anything prohibited by law.
(2)

A person who commits the offence referred to in sub-

section (1) shall be liable to a sentence of imprisonment for a term
not exceeding six months or a fine not exceeding five thousand
rupees or both the sentences.
88.

Statute of limitation: No complaint shall lie after the lapse of three
months from the date of knowledge of the commission of any
offence under Section 78, 80 or 83 and from the date of the
commission of any offence under the other Sections of this Chapter.

56

Chpater-4
Offences against Public Justice
89.

Prohibition of fabricating evidence: (1) Except as otherwise
provided in this Act, no person shall fabricate evidence, cause any
circumstance to exist, forge any document or electronic record or
make any false entry in any document or electronic record, with
intent to use it in a judicial or other legal proceeding.
(2)

A person who commits, or causes to be committed, the

offence referred to in sub-section (1) shall be liable to a sentence of
imprisonment for a term not exceeding five years and a fine not
exceeding fifty thousand rupees.
Provided that where a sentence of imprisonment for life has
been imposed on any person on the basis of such false evidence, the
offender shall be liable to a sentence of imprisonment for a term not
exceeding seven years and a fine not exceeding seventy thousand
rupees.
(3)

Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this

Section, no sentence shall be so imposed under this Section that the
sentence is in excess of the maximum sentence that can be imposed
on the offence in relation to which the evidence has been fabricated.
90.

Prohibition of making or issuing false certificate: (1) No person
with authority or duty under law to submit, certify, authenticate or
issue a certificate or submit an affidavit in relation to any matter
shall submit, certify, authenticate or issue such certificate or submit
such affidavit, knowingly setting down a false statement in such
certificate or affidavit.

57

(2)

A person who commits, or causes to be committed, the

offence referred to in sub-section (1) shall be liable to a sentence of
imprisonment for a term not exceeding two years and a fine not
exceeding twenty thousand rupees.
91.

Prohibition of using false evidence or certificate: (1) No person
shall, knowing that any evidence or certificate is false, use, or cause
to be used, as true such false evidence or certificate.
(2)

A person who commits, or causes to be committed, the

offence referred to in sub-section (1) shall be liable to a sentence of
imprisonment for a term not exceeding three years and a fine not
exceeding thirty thousand rupees.
92.

Prohibition of destroying document: (1) No person who is under a
legal duty to produce any document or electronic record as evidence
in a judicial or other legal proceeding shall knowingly destroy,
obliterate, render illegible such document or record, or otherwise
make it incapable of being used as evidence.
(2)

A person who commits, or causes to be committed, the

offence referred to in sub-section (1) shall be liable to a sentence of
imprisonment for a term not exceeding two years and a fine not
exceeding twenty thousand rupees.
(3)

No person shall, in contravention of law, knowingly

destroy, obliterate, render illegible any document or electronic record
produced in any judicial or other legal proceeding or otherwise
making such document or record incapable of being used as evidence
or cause it to disappear illegally or give it to another person in an
unauthorized manner.

58

(4)

A person who commits, or causes to be committed, the

offence referred to in sub-section (3) shall be liable to a sentence of
imprisonment for a term not exceeding four years and a fine not
exceeding forty thousand rupees.
(5)

If a public servant commits the offence referred to in

sub-section (1) or (3), he or she shall be liable to double the sentence
referred to in that sub-section.
93.

Prohibition of concealing evidence of offence: (1) No person shall,
with intent to protect any offender, conceal or destroy any evidence
relating to the offense committed by the offender or render it
ineligible to be used as evidence.
(2)

A person who commits, or causes to be committed, the

offence referred to in sub-section (1) shall be liable to a sentence of
imprisonment for a term not exceeding three years and a fine not
exceeding thirty thousand rupees.
94.

Prohibition of obstructing the giving of information: (1) No
person shall restraint or otherwise obstruct or hinder a person who,
upon knowing that an offence has been committed or is about to be
committed, intends to give information or notice about such offence
to the police or competent authority.
(2)

A person who commits, or causes to be committed, the

offence referred to in sub-section (1) shall be liable to a sentence of
imprisonment for a term not exceeding two years or a fine not
exceeding twenty thousand rupees or both the sentences.

59

95.

Prohibition of harboring offender: (1) No person shall knowingly
harbor an offender with intent to prevent him or her from being
apprehended or save him or her from a lawful sentence.
Explanation: For the purposes of this Section, the term
“offender” means a person who is suspected or accused of an offence
or convicted by a court of such offence.
(2)

A person who commits, or causes to be committed, the

offence referred to in sub-section (1) shall be liable to the sentence as
follows:
(a)

Sentence of imprisonment for a term not exceeding five
years and a fine not exceeding fifty thousand rupees
where that person has harbored the offender of an
offence punishable by imprisonment for life or
imprisonment for a term not exceeding twenty years,

(b)

Sentence of imprisonment for a term not exceeding
three years and a fine not exceeding thirty thousand
rupees where that person has harbored the offender of
an offence punishable by imprisonment for a term not
exceeding ten years,

(c)

Sentence of imprisonment or fine not exceeding one
fourth of the maximum term of imprisonment or amount
of fine or both the sentences imposable for the offence
where that person has harbored the offender of the
offence other than that mentioned in clause (a) or (b).

(3)

Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1),

no offence referred to in this Section shall be considered to have

60

been committed where the offender's husband or wife or father,
mother, son, daughter, elder brother, younger brother, elder sister,
younger sister, grand-father, grand-mother, grand-son, granddaughter, mother-in-law, father-in-law, daughter-in-law or son-inlaw has harbored the offender.
96.

Obligation to give information of commission of offence: (1) No
person under a legal duty to give information regarding any offence
shall, knowing that such offence has been or is going to be
committed, omit to give information of such offence or no person
who knows the commission of any offence shall intentionally give
false information about that offence.
(2)

A person who commits, or causes to be committed, the

offence referred to in sub-section (1) shall be liable to a sentence of
imprisonment for a term not exceeding two years or a fine not
exceeding twenty thousand rupees or both the sentences.
97.

Prohibition of concealment of property or fraudulent claim to
property: (1) No person shall fraudulently conceal, transfer or
deliver to any person, or caused to be concealed, transferred or
delivered, any property, or right in such property, which is liable to
be forfeited, withheld, auctioned, sold or enforced or inventory of
which is to be taken pursuant to a decision of a court or competent
authority, intending thereby to prevent that property or right from
being so forfeited, withheld, auctioned, sold or enforced or make a
claim to such property or right therein.
(2)

A person who commits, or causes to be committed, the

offence referred to in sub-section (1) shall be liable to a sentence of

61

imprisonment for a term not exceeding two years or a fine not
exceeding twenty thousand rupees or both the sentences.
98.

Prohibition of making false complaint: (1) No person shall, with
intent to injure or annoy any person, make a false claim or accusation
or give false information against such person before or to an
authority making judicial proceeding.
(2)

A person who commits, or causes to be committed, the

offence referred to in sub-section (1) shall be liable half the
maximum sentence imposable for the offence in respect of which
such false accusation has been made.
Provided that the provision of this Section shall not apply to
any case in which the Government of Nepal is plaintiff.
(3)

Where the offence referred to in sub-section (1) has

resulted in any kind of harm or loss to a person who is a victim of
such offence, compensation for such harm or loss shall be recovered
from the offender to the victim.
99.

Prohibition of making investigation or prosecution maliciously:
(1) No authority responsible by law for making investigation or
prosecution shall make investigation or prosecution maliciously,
with intent to have an innocent person bear liability or to save the
real offender.
(2)

A person who commits, or causes to be committed, the

offence referred to in sub-section (1) shall be liable to a sentence of
imprisonment for a term not exceeding six months or a fine not
exceeding five thousand rupees or both the sentences.

62

(3)

Where any person suffers any kind of harm or loss from

the offence referred to in sub-section (1), he or she shall be entitled
to get compensation from such offender.
100. Prohibition of failure to appear in violation of terms and
conditions of guarantee: (1) No person who has been charged with
an offence and released on guarantee shall fail, without a reasonable
cause, to appear in the office or court to which guarantee is given in
accordance with the terms and conditions of such guarantee.
Explanation: For the purpose of this Section, “guarantee”
means cash, bank guarantee or personal guarantee.
(2)

A person who commits the offence referred to in sub-

section (1) shall be liable to a sentence of imprisonment for a term
not exceeding one year or a fine not exceeding ten thousand rupees
or both the sentences.
(3)

Where a person who fails to so appear under this

Section is convicted of the offence with which he or she has been
charged shall be liable to the additional sentence under this Section,
in addition to the sentence imposable on him or her for such offence.
(4)

Where a person who is released on personal guarantee

in accordance with law fails to appear in the office or court in
accordance with such guarantee, the person giving such guarantee
shall be liable to a sentence of fine not exceeding fifty thousand
rupees.
(5)

A person who has been sentenced under this Section

shall not be eligible to become a surety without security until three
years.

63

101. Prohibition of obstructing apprehension or escaping from
custody: (1) No person for whose apprehension an arrest warrant has
been issued shall knowingly make any obstruction, by using force, in
the course of apprehension or to the apprehension of himself or
herself or to escape from apprehension if already apprehended or no
person who is lawfully detained in custody shall escape or attempt to
escape from such custody.
(2)

A person who commits, or causes to be committed, the

offence referred to in sub-section (1) shall be liable to a sentence of
imprisonment for a term not exceeding three years or a fine not
exceeding thirty thousand rupees or both the sentences.
102. Prohibition of obstructing apprehension or rescuing from
custody: (1) No person shall intentionally make obstruction in the
course of apprehension of or to the apprehension of any other person
for whose apprehension an arrest warrant has been issued in
accordance with law or rescue such other person from apprehension
if already apprehended or intentionally escape or aid in the escape of
a person who is lawfully detained in custody from such custody.
(2)

A person who commits, or causes to be committed, the

offence referred to in sub-section (1) shall be liable to a sentence of
imprisonment for a term not exceeding three years or a fine not
exceeding thirty thousand rupees or both the sentences.
(3)

If any public servant commits or causes to be committed

the offence referred to in sub-section (1), he or she shall be liable to
double the sentence specified in sub-section (2).

64

103. Statute of limitation: (1) There shall be no statute of limitation for
making a complaint in relation to any of the offences referred to in
Section 101 or 102.
(2)

No complaint shall lie after the lapse of three months

from the date of commission of the offence under Section 100 and
from the date of knowledge of the commission of any of the other
offences under this Chapter.

65

Chapter-5
Offences against Public Interest, Health, Safety,
Convenience and Morals
104. Prohibition of spreading infectious disease: (1) No person shall do
any act that spreads or is likely to spread any kind of infectious
disease which is dangerous to life of any one.
(2)

A person who commits, or causes to be committed, the

offence referred to in sub-section (1) shall be liable to a sentence of
imprisonment for a term not exceeding ten years and a fine not
exceeding one hundred thousand rupees, if the offence has been
committed intentionally or knowingly, to a sentence of imprisonment
for a term not exceeding five years and a fine not exceeding fifty
thousand rupees, if the offence has been committed recklessly, and to
a sentence of imprisonment for a term not exceeding three years and
a fine not exceeding thirty thousand rupees, if the offence has been
committed negligently.
105. Prohibition of transmitting human immuno-deficiency virus
(HIV positive): (1) No person, knowing that his or her own body or
any other's body contains human immuno-deficiency virus (HIV
positive) or the virus of Hepatitis B, shall with intent to transmit such
disease to another person, donate his or her blood to such person or
cause the donation of such other person's blood or have sexual
intercourse with any one without taking any kind of precaution or
transfuse in any way his or her or such person's blood, semen, saliva,
sputum or human organ into other's body.

66

(2)

A person who commits, or causes to be committed, the

offence referred to in sub-section (1) shall be liable to a sentence of
imprisonment for a term not exceeding ten years and a fine not
exceeding one hundred thousand rupees.
Provided that where such disease has got transmitted with
negligence or recklessness, failing any intent to transmit it, the
offender shall be liable to a sentence of imprisonment for a term not
exceeding three years and a fine not exceeding thirty thousand
rupees.
(3)

Where the victim himself or herself has solicited and

established sexual intercourse with a person having the human
immuno-deficiency virus or the virus of Hepatitis B, the person
having the infection of such virus shall not be considered to have
committed the offence referred to in this Section.
106. Prohibition of violating law relating to communicable disease: (1)
No person shall violate any rule, directive or order relating to
communicable diseases issued by the Government of Nepal, State
Government or Local Level or the competent authority under law.
(2)

A person who commits, or causes to be committed, the

offence referred to in sub-section (1) shall be liable to a sentence of
imprisonment for a term not exceeding six months or a fine not
exceeding five thousand rupees or both the sentences.
Provided that where any violation of such rule, directive or
order is likely to cause the death of a person, the offender shall be
liable to the sentence under Section 104.

67

107. Prohibition of adulteration of food: (1) No person shall produce
any food or drink to be consumed by the public by mixing into it any
injurious substance that is inedible, undrinkable or inconsumable or
any substance that is edible, drinkable or consumable but
substandard or any injurious chemical substance, or sell or distribute
it or sell or distribute any food of which expiry date has expired or
which is adulterated or sell, distribute, import or offer for sale or
distribution any food of standard falling short of the prescribed
standard or inedible substance.
(2)

Any person who commits, or causes to be committed,

the offence referred to in sub-section (1) shall be liable to a sentence
of imprisonment for a term not exceeding five years and a fine not
exceeding fifty thousand rupees.
108. Prohibition of selling, distributing food by misrepresentation: (1)
No person shall sell or distribute any food, lying or misrepresenting
that it is a different food or that a food which is of low quality or
inedible is a food of high quality, or mixing any food substance of
low standard or inedible food substance into any food substance of
high quality
(2)

A person who commits, or causes to be committed, the

offence referred to in sub-section (1) shall be liable to a sentence of
imprisonment for a term not exceeding five years or a fine not
exceeding fifty thousand rupees or both the sentences.
109. Prohibition of selling or distributing goods by misrepresentation:
(1) No person shall sell any low quality good, except food, by
misrepresenting that such good is original one or any good by
causing to believe that it is a different good or any good so

68

adulterated as to degrade its quality or change a label on any good or
sell any good of which the date of expiry has expired.
(2)

A person who commits, or causes to be committed, the

offence referred to in sub-section (1) shall be liable to a sentence of
imprisonment for a term not exceeding three years or a fine not
exceeding thirty thousand rupees or both the sentences.
110. Prohibition of hoarding consumable goods intended for sale: (1)
No person shall increase the price of any consumable goods by
creating an artificial shortage of such goods in the market or sell, or
cause to be sold, such goods at higher price or dump, store or hoard
such goods by refraining from selling such goods with the motive of
making undue profit from the sale of such goods.
(2)

A person who commits, or causes to be committed, the

offence referred to in sub-section (1) shall be liable to a sentence of
imprisonment for a term not exceeding five years and a fine not
exceeding fifty thousand rupees.
111. Prohibition of fouling water: (1) No person shall foul the water to
be consumed by the public or the water of any public spring so as to
render it unfit for drinking or foul the water to be used for any
purpose other than drinking so as to render it unfit for that purpose.
(2)

A person who commits, or causes to be committed, the

offence referred to in sub-section (1) shall be liable to the sentence as
follows:
(a) Imprisonment for a term not exceeding three years or a
fine not exceeding thirty thousand rupees or both the

69

sentences, in the case of a person who fouls, or causes
to be fouled, drinking water or its spring,
(b)

Imprisonment for a term not exceeding six months or a
fine not exceeding five thousand rupees or both the
sentences, in the case of a person who fouls, or causes
to be fouled, water to be used for other purpose.

112. Prohibition of polluting environment: (1) No person shall
generate, transmit, release or stockpile wastages in such a manner as
to cause significant adverse impact on the environment.
(2)

No person shall cause pollution in such a manner as to

cause injury to public health or danger to body or life of the public,
or generate, transmit, emit or stockpile, sound, heat or radioactive
wave or hazardous waste, as the case may be, from a mechanical
device.
(3)

A person who commits, or causes to be committed, the

offence referred to in sub-section (1) shall be liable to a sentence of
imprisonment for a term not exceeding one year or a fine not
exceeding ten thousand rupees or both the sentences.
(4)

A person who commits, or causes to be committed, the

offence referred to in sub-section (2) shall be liable to a sentence of
imprisonment for a term not exceeding five years or a fine not
exceeding fifty thousand rupees or both the sentences.
113. Prohibition of causing danger or obstruction in public way, river
or place: (1) No person shall, by doing any act or by omitting to take
order with or maintain any property of him or her or under his or her

70

control or charge, cause danger, obstruction or hindrance to any one
in any public way, river or other public place.
(2)

A person who commits, or causes to be committed, the

offence referred to in sub-section (1) shall be liable to a sentence of a
fine not exceeding twenty-five thousand rupees.
114. Prohibition of reckless conduct in using toxic or explosive
substance: (1) No person shall do, in the operation or with the use of
any explosive substance or fire or inflammable substance, explosive
substance or deadly weapon or machine, any act so recklessly as to
endanger or to be likely to cause injury to human body or life or
knowingly or recklessly omit to make such arrangement with such
substance of him or her or under his or her possession or charge as is
necessary to prevent any probable danger to human life.
(2)

A person who commits, or causes to be committed, the

offence referred to in sub-section (1) shall be liable to a sentence of
imprisonment for a term not exceeding one year or a fine not
exceeding ten thousand rupees or both the sentences.
115. Prohibition of recklessness conduct with respect to constructing,
demolishing or repairing buildings: (1) No person shall, in
constructing, demolishing or repairing a building, knowingly or
recklessly omits to take such arrangement with that building as is
necessary to guard against or prevent any probable danger to cause
death of or grievous hurt to any one from such act or from the fall or
collapse of that building or any part thereof.
(2)

A person who commits, or causes to be committed, the

offence referred to in sub-section (1) shall be liable to a sentence of

71

imprisonment for a term not exceeding one year or a fine not
exceeding ten thousand rupees or both the sentences.
116. Prohibition of reckless conduct with respect to animals and
birds: (1) No person shall, in keeping or caring and cultivating any
violent or other animal or bird of him or her or under his or her
control or custody, knowingly or recklessly omits to take such
precautionary measure with that animal or bird as is necessary to
guard against or prevent any probable danger to cause death of or
grievous hurt to any one from such act or from such animal or bird.
(2)

A person who commits, or causes to be committed, the

offence referred to in sub-section (1) shall be liable to a sentence of
imprisonment for a term not exceeding one year or a fine not
exceeding ten thousand rupees or both the sentences.
117. Prohibition of setting animal free: (1) No person shall set any
animal or bird of him or her or under his or her custody or control
free to other's house or land, public road or way or public place.
(2)

A person who commits, or causes to be committed, the

offence referred to in sub-section (1) shall be liable to a sentence of
imprisonment for a term not exceeding one year or a fine not
exceeding ten thousand rupees or both the sentences.
118. Prohibition of indecent conduct: (1) No person shall enter into a
public place or any place where he or she has no legal right to enter
into and behave any one indecently or manhandle or annoy any
woman, child or person with physical disability in any public place
or attempt to do such act.

72

(2)

A person who commits, or causes to be committed, the

offence referred to in sub-section (1) shall be liable to a sentence of
imprisonment for a term not exceeding one year or a fine not
exceeding ten thousand rupees or both the sentences.
119. Prohibition of soliciting prostitution: (1) No person shall solicit
prostitution.
(2)

A person who commits, or causes to be committed, the

offence referred to in sub-section (1) shall be liable to a sentence of
imprisonment for a term not exceeding three years and a fine not
exceeding thirty thousand rupees.
120. Prohibition of providing house, land to be used for prostitution
or sexual intercourse with prostitute: (1) No person shall
knowingly provide his or her house, land or means of transport for
the purpose of prostitution or having sexual intercourse with a
prostitute.
(2)

A person who commits the offence referred to in sub-

section (1) shall be liable to a sentence of imprisonment for a term
not exceeding six months or a fine not exceeding five thousand
rupees or both the sentences.
121. Prohibition of producing or selling obscene books, pamphlets
etc: (1) No person shall commit any of the following acts, including
producing any obscene book, pamphlet publicly:
(a)

Producing, printing or publishing or circulating through
electronic media any obscene book, pamphlet, drawing,
film, picture, record or any other item which is

73

lascivious (increases physical libido) or appeals to the
prurient interest or makes characterless,
(b)

Purchasing, selling, distributing or letting to hire or
publicly exhibiting such obscene item or holding such
item with intent to do so,

(c)

Advertising that such obscene item is available from
any person in this way,

(d)

Exporting or importing or holding such obscene item
with intent to sell, distribute it.

(2)

A person who commits the offence referred to in sub-

section (1) shall be liable to a sentence of imprisonment for a term
not exceeding one year or a fine not exceeding ten thousand rupees
or both the sentences.
(3)

Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this

Section, the provision of this Section shall not apply to any work
which is in the interest of, or which is of importance from the
perspective of, science, education, art, literature, research or learning
or which is kept or made for a religious purpose.
122. Prohibition of showing sexual organ in public place: (1) No
person above ten years of age shall, except for the purpose of
medical sciences or treatment, do any obscene act or conduct or
show his or her sexual organ or utter or make any obscene words or
gesture to any one in a public place.
(2)

A person who commits the offence referred to in sub-

section (1) shall be liable to a sentence of imprisonment for a term

74

not exceeding six months or a fine not exceeding five thousand
rupees or both the sentences.
123. Prohibition of having sexual intercourse in public place: (1) No
person shall have sexual intercourse with any one or any kind of
unnatural sexual intercourse in a public place, or in any other place
in a manner that such intercourse is visible to others.
(2)

A person who commits the offence referred to in sub-

section (1) shall be liable to a sentence of imprisonment for a term
not exceeding one year or a fine not exceeding ten thousand rupees
or both the sentences.
124. Prohibition of committing public nuisance: (1) Except as
otherwise provided in a law, no person shall do any act or omit to do
any act legally required to be done, which causes any kind of harm,
injury, danger or annoyance to the public or to the people who dwell
in the vicinity.
(2)

A person who commits the offence referred to in sub-

section (1) shall be liable to a sentence of fine not exceeding twentyfive thousand rupees.
125. Prohibition of gambling or betting: (1) No person shall gamble or
cause gambling.
(2)

A person who commits the offence referred to in sub-

section (1) shall be liable to the sentence as follows:
(a)

Imprisonment for a term not exceeding three
months or a fine not exceeding thirty thousand
rupees, in the case of one who gambles or causes
any one to gamble for the first time,

75

(b)

Imprisonment for a term not exceeding one year
and a fine not exceeding fifty thousand rupees, in
the case of one who gambles or causes any one to
gamble for the second time, and additional
sentence of imprisonment for a term not
exceeding three months and a fine not exceeding
ten thousand rupees for every subsequent offence.

Explanation: For the purposes of this Act,(1)

"gambling" means a game or process of any type
to be so played by betting as to gain, lose or win
any kind of movable or immovable property or
return, on the basis of contingency, and this term
also includes any betting or waging so made by
one who does not gamble himself or herself as to
gain or lose any movable, immovable property or
return depending on the win or loss of others.
Provided that any of the following games
or programs shall not be considered to be
gambling:
(a)

A game so played, with the approval of the
Government of Nepal, for entertainment in
a public ceremony, fair, feast, festival,
exhibition or event that a small amount of
movable property is won or lost,

(b)

A lottery operated with the approval of the
authorized authority.

76

(2)

"one who causes any one to gamble" means a
person who causes gambling by knowingly
providing a house, room, space or vehicle under
his or her ownership, possession, use or custody
or by providing any kind of instrument

for

gambling.
(3)

All instruments used for gambling and movable and

immovable properties earned from gambling shall be forfeited.
Provided that a house, room, place or means of transport
where gambling has taken place shall not be forfeited.
(4)

No person shall bet or cause betting.

(5)

For the purposes of sub-section (4), a person who so

bets that he or she will receive or lose any movable, immovable
property or consideration if any particular party wins or loses any
game or process that can be played, or caused to be played, under
law shall be considered to have committed the offence of betting.
(6)

In the event of commission of the offence referred to in

sub-section (4), the offender shall be liable to a sentence of
imprisonment for a term not exceeding one year and a fine not
exceeding ten thousand rupees, along with the forfeiture of the
claimed amount used in the offence.
(7)

Convictions pronounced by a court shall be taken into

account for the purpose of establishing recidivism in relation to the
offence referred to in this Section.
126. Prohibition of soliciting alms (begging) or causing begging: (1)
No person shall solicit alms (begging) in a public place or use a child

77

for the purposes of begging under the pretense of singing, dancing,
playing or doing any act or use other person for purposes of begging,
in return for any kind of money or wages paid by him or her to that
other person, or abet begging.
(2)

A person who commits the offence referred to in sub-

section (1) shall be liable to the sentence as follows and the claimed
amount of begging shall also be forfeited:
(a)

Imprisonment for a term not exceeding one month or a
fine not exceeding one thousand rupees, in the case of
begging for the first time, and imprisonment for a term
not exceeding two months or a fine not exceeding two
thousand rupees for every instance, from the second
instance onwards,

(b)

Imprisonment for a term not exceeding one year or a
fine not exceeding ten thousand rupees or both the
sentences, in the case of causing begging for the first
time, and imprisonment for a term not exceeding three
years or a fine not exceeding thirty thousand rupees or
both the sentences for every instance, from the second
instance onwards.
Explanation: For the purposes of this Section,(1)

begging by a sage, saint, hermit or monk visiting
home to home as per the tradition practiced from
time immemorial or begging in any religious or
cultural work shall not be considered to be an
offence under this Section,

78

(2)

"public place" means any road, street, park, motor
vehicle stop, government

office or office

premises, and this term also includes a means of
transport in public use.
127. Compensation to be paid: Where any harm or loss is caused to any
one or any property of any one from any of the offences referred to
in Sections 104, 105, 106, 107, 108, 109, 110, 111, 113, 114, 115,
116, 117, 118 and 124 of this Chapter, compensation shall be
ordered to be paid by the offender to the person who so suffers such
harm or loss.
128. Statute of limitation: (1) In the case of any offence under this
Chapter which has caused the death of any one, there shall be no
statute of limitation for making a complaint in relation to such
offence.
(2)

No complaint shall lie after the expiry of three months

after the date of commission of any of the offences under Sections
113,114, 115, 116, 117, 118, 119, 120, 121 and 122 and after the
expiry of six months from the date of knowledge of commission of
any of the other offences under this Chapter.

79

Chapter-6
Offences Relating to Arms and Ammunitions
129. Prohibition of manufacturing arms without obtaining license: (1)
No person shall manufacture or repair arms and ammunition without
obtaining a license or in a manner to be contrary to the terms and
restrictions specified in the license, even if, obtained.
Explanation: For the purposes of this Act,(a)

"arms" means a canon, mortar, tank, machine gun, rifle,
gun, pistol, revolver or other device of similar nature to
be operated by using or not using ammunition, and this
term also includes spare parts of and machinery and
equipment for manufacturing any arms,

(b)

"machine gun" means a brain gun, luis gun, stain gun,
machine, carbine, toms machine carbine, GMG, short
machine gun or automated arms of similar nature, and
this term also includes a machine, equipment for
manufacturing a machine gun, and spare parts thereof.

(c)

"ammunition" means gun powder, cape, bullet, shell,
detonator, cartoos, fuse or other substance of similar
nature to be placed in arms.

(2)

A person who commits, or causes to be committed, the

offence referred to in sub-section (1) shall be liable to a sentence of
imprisonment for a term not exceeding ten years and a fine not
exceeding one hundred thousand rupees, according to the gravity of
the risks of arms or ammunition in question.

80

130. Prohibition of transaction of arms without obtaining license: (1)
No person shall transact arms and ammunition without obtaining a
license or in a manner to be contrary to the terms and restrictions
specified in the license, even if, obtained.
Explanation: For the purposes of this Chapter, "transaction"
means procurement, sale, transport, obtaining ownership, transfer,
accumulating, stockpiling or collection, storage, export or import.
(2)

A person who commits, or causes to be committed, the

offence referred to in sub-section (1) shall be liable to a sentence of
imprisonment for a term not exceeding seven years and a fine not
exceeding seventy thousand rupees.
131. Prohibition of acquisition of specific type of arms: (1) No person
shall acquire the following arms, by way of procurement, sale,
donation, gift, reward, partition, succession or otherwise, retain,
stockpile or store such arms, or use, transport, export or import such
arms except with the order of the competent authority:
(a)

A tank and ammunition thereof,

(b)

A cannon or mortar and ammunition thereof,

(c)

A machine gun and ammunition thereof,

(d)

Any kind of rifle and ammunition thereof,

(e)

Such other arms and ammunition thereof as specified by
the competent authority that such arms and ammunition
are prohibited from being acquired or held by the
public.

81

(2)

A person who acquires any arms set forth in sub-section

(1) shall, within thirty-five days from the date of acquisition thereof,
surrender such arms to the concerned District Administration Office.
(3)

A person who commits, or causes to be committed, the

offence referred to in sub-section (1) shall be liable to a sentence of
imprisonment for a term not exceeding seven years and a fine not
exceeding seventy thousand rupees.
(4)

Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this

Section, nothing shall be deemed to bar any officer and personnel of
the Nepal Army, Nepal Police, Armed Police Force, Nepal
concerned with security work or other security personnel who are
entitled to use arms lawfully from holding or using such arms in the
course of discharging their respective duties.
132. Prohibition of retaining or carrying arms without license: (1) No
person shall acquire, retain, stockpile, use or carry such arms as may
be allowed by law to be acquired, held, stockpiled, used or carried,
without obtaining a license or in a manner to be contrary to the terms
and restrictions specified in the license, even if, obtained.
Provided that nothing shall bar any officer and personnel of
the Nepal Army, Nepal Police, Armed Police Force, Nepal
concerned with security work or other security personnel who are
entitled to use arms lawfully from holding, using or carrying such
arms in the course of discharging their respective duties.
(2)

A person who commits, or causes to be committed, the

offence referred to in sub-section (1) shall be liable to a sentence of

82

imprisonment for a term not exceeding five years and a fine not
exceeding fifty thousand rupees.
133. Obligation to maintain records of transaction of arms,
ammunition: (1) A person who carries out transaction of arms or
ammunition by obtaining a license shall maintain separate records of
the arms and ammunition transacted by him or her.
(2)

The records maintained pursuant to sub-section (1) shall

set out, inter alia, the following matters:
(a)

Type, description and quantity of the arms
procured

or

sold,

transported,

stockpiled,

exported or imported by him or her,
(b)

In the case of a sale of arms to any one, the
purchaser’s name, surname, address, citizenship
or passport number, date and place of issue of
citizenship certificate or passport,

(3)

A person who carries out the transaction of arms or

ammunition shall, when so asked, show the records referred to in
sub-section (2) to the authority controlling or administering arms and
ammunition, the investigating authority or a court.
(4)

Where any person other than one who carries out the

commercial transaction of arms or ammunition by obtaining a license
intends to carry out the transaction of arms and ammunition, he or
she shall obtain approval of the concerned District Administration
Office to that effect.
(5)

A person who does, or causes to be done, any act

contrary to sub-section (1), (3) or (4) shall be liable to a sentence of

83

imprisonment for a term not exceeding two years and a fine not
exceeding twenty thousand rupees.
134. Prohibition of production or transaction of nuclear, chemical,
biological (bacteriological) or toxin weapons: (1) No person shall
manufacture, produce, procure, sell, acquire, own, transfer, stockpile,
store, transport, export or import, invest in or manage any type of
nuclear, chemical, biological (bacteriological) or toxic weapons or
cause any one to do so.
Explanation: For the purposes of this Section,(a)

"chemical weapon" means any chemical weapon as
defined by the Convention on the Prohibition of the
Development, Production, Stockpiling and Use of
Chemical Weapons and their Destruction, done at Paris
on 13 January 1993.

(b)

"biological or toxin weapon" means any biological
(bacteriological) or toxin weapon as defined by the
Convention on the Prohibition of the Development,
Production

and

Stockpiling

of

Bacteriological

(Biological) and Toxin Weapons and their Destruction,
done at London, Moscow and Washington on 10 April,
1972.
(2)

A person who commits the offence referred to in sub-

section (1) shall be liable to a sentence of imprisonment for a term
not exceeding twenty years and a fine not exceeding two hundred
thousand rupees.

84

135. Forfeiture of movable, immovable property related to offence: In
the event of the commission of any offence under this Chapter, the
arms and ammunition related to such offence, and machinery,
equipment, instrument or vehicle producing, manufacturing,
retaining or transporting such arms and proceeds of the sale and
purchase of such arms or ammunition and amount accrued or
accumulated therefrom shall be forfeited.
Provided that where the owner of the means of transport or
motor vehicle proves that he or she did not know the transportation
of such arms and ammunition, such means of transport or vehicle
shall not be forfeited.
136. Compensation caused to be paid:

Where any harm or loss is

caused to any one's body or property from the commission by any
person of any offence under this Chapter, a reasonable compensation
for such harm or loss shall be caused to be paid by the offender to the
victim.
137. Statute of limitation: No complaint shall lie, in relation to an
offence under Section 132, after the expiry of three months of the
commission of such offence, and in relation to any of the other
offences under this Chapter, after the expiry of six months from the
date of knowledge of the commission of such offence.

85

Chapter-7
Offences Relating to Explosives
138. Prohibition of production of explosives: (1) No person shall make,
prepare or produce any kind of explosives without obtaining a
license or in a manner to be contrary to the terms and restrictions
specified in the license, even if, obtained.
Explanation: For the purposes of this Act:,(a)

"explosives” means I.E.D., T.N.C. Amatol, Barotol,
Pentolite, rapid detonative explosive (RDX), tore fex,
blastic explosives, dynamite, gun powder, nitroglycerin,
gelignite, stemite, selsite, detonator, blastic cap,
electronic blastic cap, fuse, fireworks, cracker, gun
cotton, gun powder, ballistic powder, mercury or
fullunet made of any other metal, any other explosive
substance of similar nature, which is capable of
exploding and causing loss, or any substance so
specified by the Government of Nepal by a notification
in the Nepal Gazette, and this term also includes a
bomb.

(b)

"bomb" means a grenade so made of any explosive or
any means, formula, process or measure as to selfdetonate or detonate with the help of other substance, or
other object containing explosive or substance of similar
nature.

86

(2)

A person who commits, or causes to be committed, the

offence referred to in sub-section (1) shall be liable to the following
sentence:
(a)

Imprisonment for a term not exceeding ten years
and a fine not exceeding one hundred thousand
rupees, in the case of high explosives,

(b)

Imprisonment for a term not exceeding five years
and a fine not exceeding fifty thousand rupees, in
the case of low explosives,

(c)

Imprisonment for a term not exceeding three
years and a fine not exceeding thirty thousand
rupees, in the case of ordinary explosives,

(d)

Imprisonment for a term not exceeding two years
and a fine not exceeding twenty thousand rupees,
in the case of a person who produces, uses,
retains or otherwise transacts any equipment,
machinery or instrument for producing or
manufacturing explosives.

Explanation: For the purposes of this Chapter,(1)

"high explosives" means dynamite, nitroglycerin,
TNC, gelignite mornqtarlab, mercury fullunet,
R.D.X.

amatol,

barotol,

pentolite,

stemite,

selsightal, blastic explosive bomb and other
explosive of similar nature.
(2)

"low

explosives"

means

blastic

powder,

gunpowder, gun cotton, mercury or fullunet made

87

of any other metal and other explosive of similar
nature.
(3)

"ordinary explosives" means detonator, blastic
cap, electronics blastic cap, fuse, firework,
cracker and other explosives of similar nature.

139. Prohibition of transaction of explosives: (1) No person shall
transact explosives without obtaining a license or in a manner to be
contrary to the terms and restrictions specified in the license, even if,
obtained.
Explanation: For the purposes of this Chapter, the term
"transaction" means procurement, sale, retention, use, stockpiling,
storage, transport, alteration, mixing, export or import.
(2)

A person who commits the offence referred to in sub-

section (1) shall be liable to the following sentence:
(a)

Imprisonment for a term not exceeding ten years and a
fine not exceeding one hundred thousand rupees, in the
case of high explosives,

(b)

Imprisonment for a term not exceeding five years and a
fine not exceeding fifty thousand rupees, in the case of
low explosives,

(c)

Imprisonment for a term not exceeding three years and a
fine not exceeding thirty thousand rupees, in the case of
ordinary explosives.

140. Prohibition of making or using artificial explosives:

(1) No

person shall alter or modify any ordinary consumable goods to be
used or consumed by the public or physical or chemical characters of

88

such goods, through any physical or chemical process, formula,
measure or method or change the form, structure or shape thereof,
and use or caused to be used, the same as a bomb of any type or any
other explosives.
(2)

A person who commits the offence referred to in sub-

section (1) shall be liable to a sentence of imprisonment for a term
not exceeding three years or a fine not exceeding thirty thousand
rupees or both the sentences.
141. Prohibition of making land mines or laying explosives: (1) No
person shall lay or place any explosive, any inflammable substance
or making an electronic ambush in a public road or way, place,
building, bridge, tunnel or any other place for the public movement
or cause obstruction to the movement or use of any other public
utilities by placing such substance or making an ambush.
(2)

A person who commits, or causes to be committed, the

offence referred to in sub-section (1) shall be liable to a sentence of
imprisonment for a term not exceeding ten years and a fine not
exceeding one hundred thousand rupees.
(3)

Where any injury or loss is caused to the body, life or

property of any one from the commission of the offence referred to
in sub-section (1), the sentence referred to in -sub-section (2) shall be
added to the sentence which is imposable by this Act on the offender
for such injury or loss.
142. Obligation to maintain records of production or transaction: (1)
A person who has obtained a licence for the production or
transaction of explosives shall, in producing, manufacturing,

89

preparing or transacting such explosives, maintain separate records
of every production or transaction of every explosive.
(2)

The records referred to in sub-section (1) shall set out,

inter alia, the following matters:
(a)

Type, description and quantity of the explosives
produced, prepared or manufactured,

(b)

In the case of the transaction of explosives, the
purpose for which such transaction has been made,

(c)

In the case of the sale and distribution of explosives,
the purchaser’s name, the purpose, and quantity of,
such sale and distribution.

(3)

A person who carries out the transaction of explosives

shall, when so asked, show the records referred to in sub-section (1)
to the competent authority controlling or administering explosives,
the investigating or prosecuting authority or the court.
(4)

A person who does, or causes to be done, any act

contrary to this Section shall be liable to imprisonment for a term not
exceeding three months or a fine not exceeding five thousand rupees
or both the sentences.
143. Obligation to take care while importing, transporting or
stockpiling explosives: (1) A person who licensed to carry out the
transaction of explosives shall, in using, carrying, transporting or
stockpiling such explosives, so use such explosives as to ensure
adequate safety according to the nature of such explosives or carry,
transport or stockpile such explosives, having kept them in
appropriate magazines.

90

(2)

A person who does, or causes to be done, any act

contrary to sub-section (1) shall be liable to a fine not exceeding fifty
thousand rupees.
144. Forfeiture of movable or immovable property related to offence:
In the event of the commission of any offence referred to in this
Chapter, any explosives related to such offence, goods, equipment,
instrument or raw materials used for producing, preparing or
manufacturing such explosives, motor vehicle or means of transport
used in the transportation or carriage of such explosives and
proceeds of the production, preparation, manufacturing or transaction
of such explosives and amount accrued or accumulated therefrom
shall be forfeited.
Provided that where the owner of the motor vehicle or means
of transport proves that he or she did not know the transportation of
the explosives, such vehicle or means of transport shall not be
forfeited.
145. Order for compensation to be paid: Where any harm or loss is
caused to the life, or any property, of any one from the commission
by a person of any of the offences under this Chapter, reasonable
compensation for such harm or loss shall be ordered to be paid by the
offender to the victim.
146. Statute of limitation: No complaint shall lie after the expiry of three
months from the date of commission of any of the offences under
Section 143 and after the expiry of six months from the date of
knowledge of commission of any of the other offences under this
Chapter.

91

Chapter-8
Offences against National and Public Heritages
147. Prohibition of owning public building, land by individual: (1) No
person shall, without prior approval of the Government of Nepal or
State Government or Local Level, obtain ownership of the following
building or land, whether making its registration or not, or otherwise
occupy, cultivate or encroach, or hinder or obstruct, in any way, the
possession or use of, such building or land:
(a)

Any government building or land held in the name of
the Government of Nepal, State Government or Local
Level or a public body under the full or majority
ownership or control of the Government of Nepal, State
Government or Local Level,

(b)

Any community or public house or land which has been
under community or public possession and use from
time immemorial.

(2)

A person who commits, or causes to be committed, an

offence referred to in sub-section (1) shall be liable to imprisonment
for a term not exceeding three years or a fine not exceeding thirty
thousand rupees or both the sentences.
(3)

Where any building, land mentioned in sub-section (1)

has already been registered in, or transmitted to, the name of any
individual, such registration or transmission also shall, ipso facto, be
void.
148. Prohibition of owning public heritage by individual: (1) No
person shall obtain the ownership of any public heritage, whether

92

making its registration or not, or hinder or obstruct, in any way, the
public possession or use of, or otherwise occupy, cultivate or
encroach such heritage, or cause harm, loss or damage to such
heritage in any way.
Explanation: For the purposes of this Section, the term
“public heritage” means any of the following heritages:
(a)

A right of way that has been in public use from
time immemorial,

(b)

A road, pasture land, water body, graveyard,
crematory, water tap, spout, well, pond, edge of
pond, spring of drinking water, canal, water
channel, meadow for animal grazing or exit for
animals, that has been in the public use,

(c)

A place where market is held,

(d)

A divine place, shrine, temple, Stupa, monastery,
mosque or church,

(e)

A public rest house, Pauwa, Sattal, Chautaro,

(f)

A

historical

statue,

monument,

cultural

monument or memorial,
(g)

A place for organizing religious or cultural
functions or ceremonies,

(h)

A national forest designated by the Government
of Nepal or forest, or any part thereof, under
ownership of the Government of Nepal, State
Government or Local Level.

93

(2)

A person who commits, or causes to be committed, the

offence referred to in sub-section (1) shall be liable to a sentence of
imprisonment for a term not exceeding five years or a fine not
exceeding fifty thousand rupees or both the sentences.
(3)

Where any public heritage referred to in sub-section (1)

has already been registered in, or transmitted to, the name of any
individual, such registration or transmission also shall, ipso facto, be
void.
149. Prohibition of encroachment of natural heritages: (1) No person
shall, except in accordance with law, encroach or possess, in any
way, any natural heritage, or sell or distribute such heritage, or cause
any harm, loss or damage to its natural structure or beauty, in any
way.
Explanation: For the purposes of this Section, the term
“natural heritage” means any of the following heritages:
(a)

A national park, wildlife or hunting reserve designated
by the Government of Nepal for the protection of the
natural environment, vegetation and wildlife,

(b)

A conservation area designated by the Government of
Nepal, river, rivulet, stream, lake, wetland or natural
water-fall, snow-peak or any part thereof, higher
mountain peak,

(c)

A wildlife, vegetation or landscape protected by the law
in force or the Government of Nepal, State Government
or Local Level,

94

(d)

A habitat of wildlife protected by the Government of
Nepal, State Government or Local Level, eco-system, or
any medicinal herb which is prohibited for sale,
distribution, export or import.

(2)

A person who commits, or causes to be committed, the

offence referred to in sub-section (1) shall be liable to a sentence of
imprisonment for a term not exceeding ten years and a fine equal to
the claimed amount if such amount is specified and a fine not
exceeding one million rupees if such amount is not specified or both
the sentences.
150. Prohibition of possession or destruction of public physical
infrastructure in unauthorized manner: (1) No person shall,
except in accordance with law, possess, in an unauthorized manner,
any public physical infrastructure or prevent any one from using
such infrastructure, or, cause any harm or loss to such infrastructure,
in any way.
Explanation: For the purposes of this Section, the term
“public physical infrastructure” means the following infrastructure to
be publicly used:
(a)

A road, way, bridge, tunnel, airport,

(b)

A water reservoir, canal, spring of drinking water, and
pond, power house, electricity transmission center or
line thereof,

(c)

A ropeway, cable car, telecommunication equipment,
radio station, television broadcasting center and tower
thereof,

95

(d)

A rail and railway;

(e)

A public bus station, public park, or

(f)

Similar other structure.

(2)

A person who commits, or causes to be committed, the

offence referred to in sub-section (1) shall be liable to a sentence of
imprisonment for a term not exceeding ten years and a fine not
exceeding one hundred thousand rupees.
151. Prohibition of dishonoring or destroying national anthem, flag
or coat-of-arms: (1) No person shall, with intention to spread hatred
against Nepal or the Government of Nepal, dishonor the national
anthem of Nepal, burn, or knowingly dishonor, the flag of Nepal, or
use such anthem, flag or coat-of-arms of Nepal at such place, on
such object or condition as it is not appropriate for its use in view of
public morality, decency or courtesy.
(2)

A person who commits, or causes to be committed, the

offence referred to in sub-section (1) shall be liable to a sentence of
imprisonment for a term not exceeding three years or a fine not
exceeding thirty thousand rupees or both the sentences.
(3)

No person shall, with intent to spread hatred against, or

dishonor a country with which Nepal has friendly relation, burn or
knowingly misuse such country's national flag or misuse such flag or
the coat-of-arms of such country or use such flag or coat-of-arms at
such place, on such object or condition as it is not appropriate for its
use in view of public morality, decency or courtesy.
(4)

No person shall, with intent to make hatred against or dishonor the
United Nations Organization or any organization associated with, or

96

specialized agency of, the United Nations Organization or any
international or regional organization of which Nepal is a member,
misuse in any way the flag or emblem of such Organization, or use
such flag or logo, motor vehicle or other object of such Organization
without approval of such Organization.
(5)

A person who commits, or causes to be committed, the

offence referred to in sub-section (3) or (4) shall be liable to a
sentence of imprisonment for a term not exceeding one year or a fine
not exceeding ten thousand rupees or both the sentences.
152. Not to insult national figures/heroes: (1) No person shall
knowingly make hatred against, dishonor or defame, any national
figure/hero specified by the Government of Nepal or demolish,
cause loss or damage to the statue, monument or memorial of such
figure/hero.
Provided that any comment made in good faith in the context
of a study, research or evaluation of the life of such figure/hero shall
not be considered to be an offence referred to in this Section.
(2)

A person who commits, or causes to be committed, the

offence referred to in sub-section (1) shall be liable to a sentence of
imprisonment for a term not exceeding six months or a fine not
exceeding five thousand rupees or both the sentences.
153. Order for compensation to be paid: Where any harm or loss is
caused from the commission of any offence referred to in Section
150, reasonable compensation for such harm or loss shall be ordered
to be paid by the offender.

97

154. Statute of limitation: There shall be no statute of limitation for
filing a complaint in relation to any of the offences under Sections
147, 148 and 149, and no complaint shall lie after the expiry of six
months from the date of commission of any of the offences under the
other Sections of this Chapter.

98

Chapter-9
Offences Relating to Religion
155. Prohibition of injuring shrines or places held sacred: (1) No
person shall damage or injure or, in any way, defile, destroy or
pollute any place of religious worship, pray or function or place,
object held sacred or burial place or place of sepulture or do similar
other act with intent to outrage or insult the religion or religious
feelings of any caste, race, community or class or with the
knowledge that such outrage or insult is likely to occur.
(2)

A person who commits, or causes to be committed, the

offence referred to in sub-section (1) shall be liable to a sentence of
imprisonment for a term not exceeding three years and a fine not
exceeding thirty thousand rupees.
(3)

Where a foreigner has committed, or caused to be

committed, the offence referred to in sub-section (1), he or she shall
be deported from Nepal within seven days after the date of
completion of the service of imprisonment under sub-section (2).
156. Prohibition of outraging religious feelings: (1) No person shall
outrage the religious feelings of any caste, race, community or class
by words, either spoken or written, by visible representation or signs
or otherwise.
(2)

A person who commits, or causes to be committed, the

offence referred to in sub-section (1) shall be liable to a sentence of
imprisonment for a term not exceeding two years and a fine not
exceeding twenty thousand rupees.

99

157. Prohibition of causing obstruction to religious rites and rituals:
(1) No person shall knowingly cause obstruction to other's religious
rites and rituals that are handed down or being followed from the
time immemorial.
(2)

A person who commits, or causes to be committed, the

offence referred to in sub-section (1) shall be liable to a sentence of
imprisonment for a term not exceeding one year or a fine not
exceeding ten thousand rupees or both the sentences.
158. Prohibition of proselytizing: (1) No person shall convert any one
from one religion to another or make attempt to or abet such conversion.
(2)

No person shall do any act or conduct which

undermines the religion, opinion or faith of any caste, race,
community or convert any one into another religion, whether by
inducement or not, in a manner to so undermine or propagate such
religion or opinion with the intention of making such conversion.
(3)

A person who commits, or causes to be committed, the

offence referred to in sub-section (1) or (2) shall be liable to a
sentence of imprisonment for a term not exceeding five years and a
fine not exceeding fifty thousand rupees.
(4)

If a foreigner commits, or causes to be committed, the

offence referred to in sub-section (1) or (2), he or she shall be
deported from Nepal within seven days after the date of completion
of the service of imprisonment imposed under this Section.
159. Statute of limitation: No complaint shall lie after the expiry of six
months from the date of knowledge of commission of the offence
under Section 158 and from the date of commission of any of the
other offences under this Chapter.

100

Chpater-10
Offences Relating to Discrimination and Other Degrading Treatment
160. Prohibition of making discriminatory treatment: (1) Except as
otherwise provided by laws, no authority who exercises power under
law shall, in the exercise of such power or a general law,
intentionally make a discriminatory treatment against any citizen on
grounds of origin, religion, color, caste, race, sex, physical condition,
disability, condition of health, marital status, pregnancy, economic
condition, language or region, ideology or on similar other grounds.
(2)

A person who commits, or causes to be committed, the

offence referred to in sub-section (1) shall be liable to a sentence of
imprisonment for a term not exceeding three years or a fine not
exceeding thirty thousand rupees or both the sentences.
161. Prohibition of purchasing, selling or distributing goods or
service with discrimination: (1) No person, in purchasing, selling or
distributing any goods or services, shall purchase, sell or distribute
such goods or services from or to only any person belonging to any
particular caste, race or community or omit to provide, sell or
distribute such goods or services to any person belonging to any
particular caste, race or community.
Provided that where a person, with the approval of the
competent authority under law, provides, sells or distributes any
particular goods or services to only any person belonging to any
particular caste, race or community, for the protection of interest and
development of a class which is economically, socially or

101

educationally backward, such person shall not be considered to have
committed the offence under this Section.
(2)

A person who commits, or causes to be committed, the

offence referred to in sub-section (1) shall be liable to a sentence of
imprisonment for a term not exceeding one year or a fine not
exceeding ten thousand rupees or both the sentences.
162. Prohibition of forced labour: (1) No person shall force any one to
work against his or her will.
Provided that this Section shall not be deemed to bar the
engaging of any one in labor for a public work in accordance with
law.
(2)

A person who commits, or causes to be committed, the

offence under sub-section (1) shall be liable to a sentence of
imprisonment for a term not exceeding three months or a fine not
exceeding five thousand rupees or both the sentences.
163. Prohibition of slavery: (1) No person shall subject any one to
slavery or servitude or hold or employ him or her in such status or
subject, or cause to be subjected, him or her to any other kind of
treatment similar thereto.
(2)

A person who commits, or causes to be committed, the

offence referred to in sub-section (1) shall be liable to a sentence of
imprisonment for a term of five to ten years and a fine of fifty
thousand to one hundred thousand rupees.
164. Prohibition of serfdom or debt bonded labour: (1) No person shall
subject any one to, or hold any one in, serfdom or debt bonded
labour for any kind of consideration or employ any one in the status

102

of serfdom or bonded labour, or subject, or cause to be subjected,
him or her to any other kind of treatment similar thereto.
(2)

A person who commits, or causes to be committed, the

offence referred to in sub-section (1) shall be liable to a sentence of
imprisonment for a term from three to seven years and a fine from
thirty thousand to one hundred thousand rupees.
165. Prohibition of undermining social rites and rituals: (1) No person
shall, by way of misrepresentation or use of force, do, or cause to be
done, any act which undermines or results in the undermining of the
social rites and rituals of any one.
Explanation: For the purposes of this Section, any rites and
rituals constituting racial discrimination shall not be considered to be
social rites and rituals.
(2)

A person who commits the offence referred to in sub-

section (1) shall be liable to a sentence of imprisonment for a term
not exceeding one year or a fine not exceeding ten thousand rupees
or both the sentences.
166. Prohibition of untouchability or discriminatory treatment on
ground of caste: (1) No person shall subject any one to
untouchability or any other kind of discrimination, or prevent any
one from appearing in any public place or entering into any religious
place of public nature, or deprive any one of using water or water
pond in public use or of the use of things of any other private or
public utility or convenience, on the grounds of custom, tradition,
religion, culture, rites or rituals, caste, race, community, profession,
occupation, physical condition or origin of social community.

103

(2)

A person who commits, or causes to be committed, the

offence referred to in sub-section (1) shall be liable to a sentence of
imprisonment for a term not exceeding three years or a fine not
exceeding thirty thousand rupees or both the sentences, and if a
public servant commits the offence referred to in this Section, he or
she shall be liable to an additional sentence of imprisonment for a
term not exceeding three months.
167. Prohibition of torture: (1) No authority who is competent under the
law in force to investigate or prosecute any offence, implement law,
take any one into control, or hold any one in custody or detention in
accordance with law shall subject, or cause to be subjected, any one
to physical or mental torture or to cruel, brutal, inhuman or
degrading treatment.
Explanation: For the purposes of this Section, intentional
inflicting of physical or mental pain or suffering on any person who
is arrested, taken into control, held in custody, detention or
imprisonment or under preventive detention or security or any other
person interested in such person or subjecting such person to cruel,
brutal, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment for the
following purpose shall be considered to constitute torture or cruel,
brutal, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment against or to
such person:
(a)

To get information on any matter,

(b)

To extort confession of any offence,

(c)

To punish for any act,

(d)

To show fear, intimidation or coercion, or

104

(e)

To do any other act contrary to law.

(2)

A person who commits the offence referred to in sub-

section (1) shall be liable to a sentence of imprisonment for a term
not exceeding five years or a fine not exceeding fifty thousand
rupees or both the sentences, according to the gravity of the offence.
(3)

A person who orders the commission of the offence

referred to in sub-section (1) or an accomplice who aids in the
commission of the offence referred to in this Section shall be liable
to the same sentence as is imposable on the principal offender.
(4)

No person who commits the offence referred to in sub-

section (1) shall be allowed to plea that he or she has committed the
offence in pursuance of an order by the authority superior to him or
her; and, on such ground, he or she shall not be exempted from the
sentence imposable on him or her for the commission of such
offence.
168. Prohibition of degrading or inhuman treatment: (1) No person
shall subject, or cause to be subjected, any one to degrading or
inhuman treatment.
Explanation: For the purposes of this Section, the following
act shall be deemed to constitute a degrading or inhumane treatment:
(a)

To accuse one of being a witch,

(b)

To expel one from his or her place of residence in
accusation of being a witch,

(c)

To ex-communicate one from the society, or

105

(d)

To make cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment by
doing any other act whatsoever.

(2)

A person who commits the offence referred to in sub-

section (1) shall be liable to a sentence of imprisonment for a term
not exceeding five years and a fine not exceeding fifty thousand
rupees.
(3)

Banishing a woman to a shed (Chhaupadi) during

menstruation or delivery, or subjecting, causing to be subjected, her
to similar other discrimination, untouchability or inhuman treatment
of any kind is prohibited.
(4)

A person who commits the offence referred to in sub-

section (3) shall be liable to a sentence of imprisonment for a term
not exceeding three months or a fine not exceeding three thousand
rupees or both the sentences.
(5)

Where a public servant commits the offence referred to

in this Section, he or she shall be liable to an additional sentence of
imprisonment for a term not exceeding three months.
169. Order for compensation to be paid: A reasonable compensation
for the injury or pain caused to the victim shall be ordered to be paid
by the person who has committed the offence referred to in this
Chapter.
170. Statute of limitation: (1)There shall be no statute of limitation for
making a complaint in relation to any of the offences referred to in
Sections 163 and 164.
(2)

No complaint shall lie after the expiry of six months

from the date of commission of the offence referred to in Section 167

106

or from the date of release of the concerned person from arrest,
control, custody, detention, imprisonment or preventive detention
and from the date of knowledge of commission of any of the other
offences referred to in this Chapter.

107

Chapter-11
Offences Relating to Marriage
171. Prohibition of concluding marriage without consent: (1) No
marriage shall be concluded, or caused to be concluded, without the
consent of the persons getting married.
(2)

A marriage concluded without the consent referred to in

sub-section (1) shall be void.
(3)

A person who commits the offence referred to in sub-

section (1) shall be liable to a sentence of imprisonment for a term
not exceeding two years and a fine not exceeding twenty thousand
rupees.
Explanation: For the purposes of this Section, a consent given
by a person who has not attained the marriageable age under Section
173 shall not be deemed to be consent.
172. Prohibition of concluding marriage in prohibited degree of
relationship: (1) Except as otherwise customarily practiced, no
person shall conclude, or cause to be concluded, marriage with one
who is within the prohibited degree of relationship by consanguinity
or affinity.
(2)

Where a marriage referred to in sub-section (1) has been

concluded in ignorance, such marriage shall be void.
(3)

Where a marriage referred to in sub-section (1) has been

concluded knowingly, the person concluding such marriage shall be
liable to the sentence imposable for the offence of incest and a
person causing the conclusion of such marriage shall be liable to a
sentence of imprisonment for a term not exceeding three months or a

108

fine not exceeding three thousand rupees or both the sentences, and
such marriage shall, ipso facto, be void.
173. Prohibition of concluding child marriage: (1) No marriage shall be
concluded or cause to be concluded unless parties to the marriage
have attained twenty years of age.
(2)

A marriage concluded in contravention of sub-section

(1) shall, ipso facto, be void.
(3)

A person who commits the offence referred to in sub-

section (1) shall be liable to a sentence of imprisonment for a term
not exceeding three years and a fine not exceeding thirty thousand
rupees.
174. Prohibition of transacting property in marriage: (1) No marriage
shall be concluded, or caused to be concluded, upon having asked
for, or on the condition of receiving or giving of, any type of
movable or immovable property, dowry or any property from the
bridegroom or the bride side, except such ordinary gift, donation,
money or one set of jewelry worn on the body as has been practiced
in his or her custom.
(2)

A person who commits the offence referred to in sub-

section (1) shall be liable to a sentence of imprisonment for a term
not exceeding three years or a fine not exceeding thirty thousand
rupees or both the sentences.
(3)

No person shall, after the conclusion of marriage, ask

the bride or her relative for any movable, immovable property or
dowry referred to in sub-section (1), or make, in any way, any
annoyance, harassment or inhuman or degrading treatment to the

109

bride or her relative for the reason that such movable, immovable
property or dowry has not been given.
(4)

A person who commits the offence referred to in sub-

section (3) shall be liable to a sentence of imprisonment for a term
not exceeding five years or a fine not exceeding fifty thousand
rupees or both the sentences.
(5)

Where any property has been taken as mentioned in

sub-section (1) or (3), such property shall be returned to the
concerned person.
175. Prohibition of bigamy: (1) No married man shall, during the
continuation of the marital relationship, conclude another marriage.
(2)

No woman shall conclude marriage with a man

knowingly that he is already married.
(3)

Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1)

or (2), a man or woman may marry again if the husband and wife
have got separated upon making partition in accordance with law.
(4)

A person who commits, or causes to be committed, the

offence referred to in sub-section (1) or (2) shall be liable to a
sentence of imprisonment for a term of one year to five years and a
fine of ten thousand to fifty thousand rupees.
(5)

The marriage referred to in sub-section (1) shall, ipso

facto, be void.
(6)

Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this

Section, nothing contained in this Section shall be deemed to have
effect on any marriage concluded in accordance with the law in force
for the time being prior to the commencement of this Act.

110

176. Statute of limitation: No complaint on any offence under this
Chapter shall lie after the expiry of three months from the date of
knowledge of the commission of the offence.

111

Chapter-12
Offences Relating to Human Body
177. Prohibition of doing act with the intention of causing death
(homicide): (1) No person shall intentionally kill, or do, or cause to
be done, any act causing the death of, another person.
Explanation: For the purposes of this Section, even if a
person intentionally causes such serious bodily injury or hurt to
another person as is likely to cause the death of that other person but
that person does not die immediately but die subsequently in
consequence of that injury or hurt, the person shall be considered to
have killed that other person.
(2)

A person who commits, or causes to be committed, the

offence referred to in sub-section (1) shall be liable to the sentence of
imprisonment for life.
178. Prohibition of doing act likely to cause death: (1) No person shall
do any act, with the knowledge that, or having reason to believe that,
such act is, in an ordinary course, likely to cause the death of another
person.
(2)

If a person dies in consequence of any act referred to in

sub-section (1), the offender shall be liable to the sentence of
imprisonment for life.
179. Prohibition of causing death by grave provocation or in heat of
passion: (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in Section 177 or
178, a person who causes the death of another person in any of the
following circumstances shall be liable to a sentence of

112

imprisonment for a term of ten to fifteen years and a fine of one
hundred thousand to one hundred fifty thousand rupees:
(a)

Where the offender, while being deprived of the power
of self-control by grave and sudden provocation, causes
the death of the person who gave such provocation,
Provided that this clause shall not apply to the
following circumstance:
(1)

Where the offender is provoked by
anything done in obedience to the law or in
the exercise of the right of private defense
or anything done or intended to be done by
a public servant in the exercise of his or her
official duties,

(2)

Where the offender himself or herself gives
provocation to another with intent to do
harm to any one and anything done by that
other person upon being so provoked
causes the death of any person.

(b)

Where the offender in the exercise in good faith of the
right of private defence exceeds the limit of such power
and causes the death of the person against whom he or
she is exercising such right of private defence,

(c)

Where death is caused instantly in the heat of passion
upon a sudden quarrel,

113

Provided that while doing any act referred to in
this clause, the offender must not have taken an undue
advantage or acted in a cruel or unusual manner.
(2)

Notwithstanding anything contained in clauses

(b) and (c) of sub-section (1), the provisions contained in these
clauses shall not be applicable to any case of murder committed with
premeditation or deliberate afterthought.
180. Punishment for homicide by causing death of person other than
person whose death was intended: Notwithstanding anything
contained in Sections 177, 178 and 179, where a person, by doing
anything which he or she intends to cause or knows to be likely to
cause or has reason to believe to be likely to cause death of any one
other than the one whose death was so intended, he or she shall be
liable to the sentence set forth in Sections 177, 178 and179, as the
case may be.
181. Prohibition of causing death by recklessness: (1) No person shall
cause the death of any one by doing a reckless act.
(2)

A person who commits the offence referred to in sub-

section (1) shall, except in the cases referred to in Sections 177, 178
and 179, be liable to a sentence of imprisonment for a term of three
to ten years and a fine of thirty thousand to one hundred thousand
rupees.
182. Prohibition of causing death by negligence: (1) Except in the case
referred to in Section 179, no person shall cause the death of any one
by doing a negligent act.

114

(2)

A person who commits the offence referred to in sub-

section (1) shall be liable to a sentence of imprisonment for a term
not exceeding three years and a fine not exceeding thirty thousand
rupees.
(3)

Except in the case referred to in sub-section (1), if any

act done by a person under such circumstances that such act is less
likely to cause death causes the death of any one accidently, that
person shall be liable to a sentence of imprisonment for a term of six
months to two years or a fine not exceeding twenty thousand rupees
or both the sentences.
183. Prohibition of committing attempt to murder: (1) No person
shall, with the intention of committing murder of anyone, commit an
attempt to murder.
(2)

A person who commits, or causes to be committed, the

offence referred to in sub-section (1) shall be liable to a sentence of
imprisonment for a term not exceeding ten years and a fine not
exceeding one hundred thousand rupees.
184. Prohibition of throwing or abandoning person under one's own
guardianship: (1) A person, being bound to care or maintain an
infant, child, disabled patient or elderly person, shall not so throw,
abandon or desert as to cause danger to the body or life of such
infant, child, patient or elderly person.
(2)

A person who commits, or causes to be committed, the

offence referred to in sub-section (1) shall be liable to a sentence of
imprisonment for a term not exceeding three years and a fine not
exceeding thirty thousand rupees.

115

(3)

If the offence referred to in sub-section (1) causes the

death of such child, disabled patient or elderly person, the offender
shall be liable to a sentence of imprisonment for a term not
exceeding seven years and a fine not exceeding seventy thousand
rupees.
Provided that if the throwing, abandonment or neglect causes
the death of an infant, the offender shall be liable to the sentence
referred to in Section 177.
185. Prohibition of abetment of suicide: (1) No person shall abet the
commission of suicide by another, or create, or cause to be created,
such circumstances as likely to lead towards the commission of such
act.
(2)

A person who commits the offence referred to in sub-

section (1) shall be liable to a sentence of imprisonment for a term
not exceeding five years and a fine not exceeding fifty thousand
rupees.
186. Order for compensation to be paid: If any harm, injury or loss is
caused to the body, life or property of any person from the
commission of any offence referred to in this Chapter, a reasonable
compensation for such harm, injury or loss shall be ordered to be
paid by the offender to the victim and to his or her successor if the
victim is unavailable.
187. Statute of limitation: (1) There shall be no statute of limitation for
making a complaint in relation to any of the offences under Sections
177, 178, 179, 180, 181, 182, and proviso to sub-section (3) of
Section 184.

116

(2)

No complaint shall lie after the expiry of six months

from the date of knowledge of the commission of any of the offences
under this Chapter other than those set forth in sub-section (1).

117

Chapter-13
Offences against Protection of Pregnancy
188. Prohibition of abortion: (1)

No person shall, except in the case

referred to in Section 189, commit abortion, or do any act with intent
to cause, or with the knowledge that, or having reason to believe that,
such act is likely to cause, abortion.
(2)

No person shall cause a pregnant woman to abort, by

coercing, threatening, alluring or inducing her to so abort.
(3)

A person who commits the offence referred to in sub-

section (1) or (2) shall be liable to:
(a)

A sentence of imprisonment for a term not exceeding
one year and a fine not exceeding ten thousand rupees in
the case of pregnancy of up to twelve weeks,

(b)

A sentence of imprisonment for a term not exceeding
three years and a fine not exceeding thirty thousand
rupees in the case of pregnancy of more than twelve
weeks and up to twenty-five weeks,

(c)

A sentence of imprisonment for a term not exceeding
five years and a fine not exceeding fifty thousand rupees
in the case of pregnancy of more than twenty-five
weeks.

(4)

If the pregnancy is not terminated at once by an act of

abortion and the child born alive but the child dies immediately after
birth as the consequence of such act, such act shall, for the purposes
of this Section, be deemed to constitute the offence of abortion.

118

(5)

If an act done by a person in making attempt to cause

the death of a pregnant woman does not cause the death of the
woman but causes the termination of her pregnancy of twenty-five
weeks or more, the offender shall be liable to a sentence of
imprisonment for a term not exceeding five years, in addition to the
sentence to be imposed under this Act or other law.
(6)

Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this

Section, if any act done by a person with premeditation against a
pregnant woman causes abortion, that person shall be liable to the
following sentence despite the fact that he or she has not done such
act with the intention of causing abortion:
(a)

A sentence of imprisonment for a term not exceeding
one year in the case of pregnancy of up to twelve weeks,

(b)

A sentence of imprisonment for a term not exceeding
three years in the case of pregnancy of more than twelve
weeks and up to twenty-five weeks,

(c)

A sentence of imprisonment for a term not exceeding
five years in the case of pregnancy of more than twentyfive weeks.

(7)

No person shall, with the intention of causing abortion,

do, or cause to be done, any act by which the sex of the foetus is
identified, and abort or cause abortion following such sex
identification.
(8)

A person who commits the offence referred to in sub-

section (7) shall be liable to:

119

(a)

A sentence of imprisonment for a term of three months
to six months, in the case of the offence of identifying,
or causing identification of, the sex of the foetus with
the intention of causing abortion, and

(b)

A sentence of imprisonment for a term not exceeding
one year, in addition to the sentence specified in subsection (3), in the case of the offence of aborting or
causing abortion after identifying the sex.

189. When abortion can be made: (1) Notwithstanding anything
contained in Section 188, where a health worker causes abortion in
any of the following circumstances, no offence of abortion under this
Act shall be deemed to have been committed:
(a)

The pregnancy of up to twelve weeks is terminated with
the consent of the pregnant woman,

(b)

The pregnancy is terminated with the consent of the
pregnant woman, upon the opinion of a licensed doctor
that her life may be in danger or her physical or mental
health may deteriorate or a handicapped child will born
if pregnancy is not terminated,

(c)

The pregnancy of up to eighteen weeks conceived from
rape or incest is terminated with the consent of the
pregnant woman,

(d)

The pregnancy of a woman with human immunedeficiency virus (HIV) or other incurable disease of
similar nature is terminated with her consent.

120

Explanation: For the purposes of this Section, the term
"health worker" means a doctor or health worker who, upon having
the specified qualification, has obtained a license for causing
abortion.
190.

Statute of limitation: No complaint shall lie after the expiry of six
months from the date of knowledge of commission of the offence
under this Chapter.

121

Chapter-14
Offences Relating to Hurt or Grievous Hurt
191. Prohibition of causing hurt: (1) No person shall cause hurt to
another person.
(2)

A person who does any of the following acts to another

person shall be deemed to cause hurt:
(a)

Any act by which any kind of bodily pain is caused,

(b)

Any act by which a disease is transferred,

(c)

Any other act by which infirmity is caused.

Explanation: For the purposes of this Section, the term
"infirmity" means the state of any part of the body being incapable of
functioning normally, and this term also includes mental infirmity.
(3)

A person who commits, or causes to be committed, the

offence referred to in sub-section (1) shall be liable to a sentence of
imprisonment for a term not exceeding three years or a fine not
exceeding thirty thousand rupees or both the sentences.
192. Prohibition of causing grievous hurt: (1) No person shall cause
grievous hurt to any other person.
(2)

Where any person does any act with the intention of

causing hurt to another person, which results in any of the following
consequences, that person is deemed to have committed the offence
of causing grievous hurt to that other person:
(a)

Making blind by making privation of the sight of, or by
breaking, either eye,

(b)

Privation of smelling power of the nose,

122

(c)

Privation of hearing power of either ear,

(d)

Privation of speaking power of the tongue,

(e)

Cutting of woman's breast,

(f)

Emasculation of man and woman (making woman
infertile or man impotent),

(g)

Privation of the backbone, …, hand, leg or joint of
such organ by breaking, fracturing, dislocating it,

(h)

Any hurt which causes the sufferer to be unable to
perform his or her professional work.

(3)

Where any act of hurt, though not causing grievous hurt

immediately, results subsequently in the consequence referred to in
sub-section (2), it shall be deemed to have caused grievous hurt.
(4)

A person who commits the offence referred to in sub-

section (1) shall be liable to a sentence of imprisonment for a term
not exceeding ten years and a fine not exceeding one hundred
thousand rupees.
(5)

Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (4),

in the case of so causing grievous hurt to either of the organs
performing the same function that it becomes dysfunctional, the
offender shall be liable to half the sentence specified in that subsection, and where the wound caused by grievous hurt gets so healed
as to restore the organ, the offender shall be liable to a sentence of
imprisonment for a term not exceeding three years and a fine not
exceeding thirty thousand rupees.

123

193. Prohibition of causing disfigurement by use of acid or other
chemical, biological or toxin substance: (1) No person shall cause
bodily pain to another person by administering acid or similar kind
of other chemical, biological or toxin substance to, or throwing such
substance on, that other person, or by burning, maiming, strolling the
body with or applying to the body such substance or disfigure the
face or any part of the body of that other person.
(2)

A person who commits the offence referred to in sub-

section (1) shall be liable, according to the nature of the offence, to a
sentence of imprisonment for a term of five to eight years and a fine
of one hundred thousand to five hundred thousand rupees in the case
of disfigurement of the face, and to a sentence of imprisonment for a
term of three to five years and a fine of fifty thousand to three
hundred thousand rupees in the case of disfigurement of any other
organ of the body or bodily pain.
(3)

The amount of fine collected in accordance with sub-

section (2) shall be paid in whole to the victim as compensation.
194. Sentence for causing hurt or grievous hurt by grave provocation
or in heat of passion: (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in
Section 191 or 192, a person who causes hurt in any of the following
circumstances shall be liable to a sentence of imprisonment for a
term not exceeding two years or a fine not exceeding twenty
thousand rupees or both the sentences in the case of a grievous hurt,
and to a sentence of imprisonment for a term not exceeding one year
or a fine not exceeding ten thousand rupees or both the sentences in
the case of any other kind of hurt:

124

(a)

Where the offender, while being deprived of the power
of self-control by grave and sudden provocation, causes
hurt to the person who gave such provocation or to any
other person by a mistake of fact or happens to cause
injury to another person by accident.
Provided that this clause shall not apply to the
following circumstance:
(1)

Where the offender causes hurt upon being
provoked by anything done in obedience to
the law or in the exercise of the right of
private defence or any anything done or
intended to be done by a public servant in
the exercise of his or her official duties,

(2)

Where the offender himself or herself gives
provocation to another with intent to cause
any harm to any one and anything done by
that other person upon being so provoked
causes hurt to any person.

(b)

Where the offender in the exercise in good faith of the
right of private defence exceeds the limit of such power
and causes injury to any person,

(c)

Where hurt is caused to any person instantly in the heat
of passion upon a sudden quarrel,
Provided that while doing any act referred to in
this clause, the offender must not have taken an undue
advantage or acted in a cruel or unusual manner.

125

(2)

Notwithstanding anything contained in clauses

(b) and (c) of sub-section (1), the provisions contained in these
clauses shall not be applicable to any case of hurt or grievous hurt
caused with premeditation or deliberate afterthought.
195. Prohibition of causing hurt or grievous hurt by recklessness or
negligence: (1) No person shall cause hurt or grievous hurt or other
injury to any one by doing a reckless or negligent act.
(2)

A person who commits the offence referred to in sub-

section (1) shall be liable to the following sentence:
(a)

A sentence of imprisonment for a term not exceeding
two years or a fine not exceeding twenty thousand
rupees or both the sentences, in the case of a grievous
hurt caused by a reckless act, and a sentence of
imprisonment for a term not exceeding one year or a
fine not exceeding ten thousand rupees or both the
sentences, in the case of any other kind of injury caused
by a reckless act,

(b)

A sentence of imprisonment for a term not exceeding
six months or a fine not exceeding five thousand rupees
or both the sentences in the case of the commission of
such offence by a negligent act.

196. Prohibition of using criminal force: (1) No person shall use
criminal force to another person.
(2)

A person shall be considered to use criminal force to

another person if he or she does any of the following acts:

126

(a) To use any kind of force to that other person with the
intention of committing an offence,
(b) To use force to that other person with the intention of
causing, or knowing it to be likely that the use of such
force will cause, injury, fear or annoyance to that other
person or his or her family or property,
(c) To terrify that other person to apprehend that force will
be used to him or her or to threat or intimidate to use
force, or attempt to use force, in any other manner, to
him or her.
(3)

Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this

Section, the use of any force, with one's consent, in the course of
imparting teaching, instruction or training on the concerned subject,
conducting acting or treatment of any kind or in a manner to render
benefit or the use of force of usual nature in the course of having any
kind of game shall not be considered to be the use of criminal force.
Provided that the provision of this sub-section shall not apply
to any malicious use of force to cause injury to any one.
(4)

A person who uses, or causes to be used, criminal force

shall be liable to a sentence of imprisonment for a term not
exceeding three years or a fine not exceeding thirty thousand rupees
or both the sentences, in the case of using criminal force by carrying
a weapon, and to a sentence of imprisonment for a term not
exceeding one year or a fine not exceeding ten thousand rupees or
both the sentences, in the case of using criminal force without
carrying a weapon.

127

197. Prohibition of making unconscious with intent to commit
offence: (1) No person shall, with intent to facilitate the commission
of any offence, feed or administer, in any other manner, to another
person any substance causing unconsciousness, dizziness or
unhealthiness or make that other person unconscious in any manner
whatsoever.
(2)

A person who commits, or causes to be committed, the

offense referred to in sub-section (1) shall be liable to a sentence of
imprisonment for a term not exceeding one year and a fine not
exceeding ten thousand rupees.
(3)

Where any act referred to in sub-section (1) has resulted

in the commission of such offence, the sentence referred to in this
Section shall be added to the sentence imposable for such offence.
198. Compensation: Where any harm, damage or loss is caused to any
person's body, life or property from the commission of the offence
referred to in this Chapter, compensation shall be caused to be paid
by the offender to the victim.
199. Statute of limitation: No complaint shall lie, in the case of the
offence referred to in Section 196, after the expiry of three months
from the date of its commission, in the case of the offence referred to
in Section 197, after the expiry of six months from the date on which
such person becomes conscious, and, in the case of any of the other
offences referred to in this Chapter, after the expiry of one year from
the date of its commission.

128

Chapter-15
Offences Relating to Unlawful Detention
200. Prohibition of unlawful confinement: (1) No person shall
maliciously subject, or cause to be subjected, another person to
detention in any other manner except in accordance with law.
(2)

A person who commits the offence referred to in sub-

section (1) shall be liable to a sentence of imprisonment for a term
not exceeding three years and a fine not exceeding thirty thousand
rupees.
(3)

No one other than the competent authority shall

obstruct, or cause to be obstructed, the movement of any person.
(4)

A person who commits the offence referred to in sub-

section (3) shall be liable to a sentence of imprisonment for a term
not exceeding six months or a fine not exceeding five thousand
rupees or both the sentences.
201. Prohibition of holding in detention without providing minimum
humane facilities: (1) No authority who is competent by law to
make detention shall detain, or cause to be detained, any person by
depriving him or her of such facilities as required to be provided in
accordance with law or of such minimum humane facilities as are
available in the place of his or her detention.
(2)

A person who commits the offence referred to in sub-

section (1) shall be liable to a sentence of imprisonment for a term
not exceeding one and half years and a fine not exceeding fifteen
thousand rupees.

129

202. Prohibition of detaining person for whose release order has been
issued: (1) No person shall keep on detaining any person held in
detention in accordance with law after receiving an order issued by a
competent authority under law for the release of such person from
detention.
(2)

A person who commits, or causes to be committed, the

offence referred to in sub-section (1) shall be liable to a sentence of
imprisonment for a term not exceeding one year and a fine not
exceeding ten thousand rupees.
203. Prohibition of detention in secret: (1) No competent authority shall
hold any person in detention secretly in such a manner that the
detention of such person or the place of such detention may not be
known or discovered.
(2)

A person who commits, or causes to be committed, the

offence referred to in sub-section (1) shall be liable to a sentence of
imprisonment for a term not exceeding four years and a fine not
exceeding forty thousand rupees.
204. Order for compensation to be paid: A reasonable compensation
shall be ordered to be paid by the offender who commits, or causes
to be committed, the offence referred to in this Chapter to the victim.
205. Statute of limitation: No complaint shall lie, in the case of an
offence under sub-section (3) of Section 200, after the expiry of three
months from the date of commission of such offence, and in the case
of any of the other offences under this Chapter, after the expiry of
three months from the date of release of the detained person from
such detention.

130

Chapter-16
Offences Relating to Enforced Disappearance
206. Prohibition of enforced appearance: (1) No person shall subject,
or cause to be subjected, any one to enforced disappearance.
(2)

For the purposes of sub-section (1), the term "enforced

disappearance” means any of the following acts:
(a)

The arrest, detention or any other form of control of a
person by a person or security personnel having
authority by law to make arrest, investigation or
enforcement of law, followed by a failure to produce
such person before the case trying authority within
twenty-four hours of the date of such arrest or
deprivation of liberty, excluding the time required for
journey, or a refusal to allow the concerned person to
meet such person, and/or by concealment of information
as to where, how and in what condition such person has
been so held,

(b)

The abduction, custody, control or any other form of
deprivation of liberty of a person by any person,
organization or group, whether organized or not,
followed by concealment of information to the
concerned person as to the reason for such deprivation
and where, how and in what condition such person has
been so held,

(3)

A person who orders the commission of enforced

disappearance of a person upon arrest, detention or control of such

131

person and a person who implements such order shall be considered
to be the principal offender of enforced disappearance.
(4)

Where an act of enforced disappearance is committed in

pursuance of order or direction given by a person holding public
office or by the responsible person of an organization or group,
whether organized or unorganized, the person giving such order or
direction shall be liable as the principal offender of enforced
disappearance.
(5)

A superior who, despite knowing that his or her

subordinate official, body or group was committing or about to
commit an act of enforced disappearance, disregards such
information or fails to take necessary measures to prevent the
commission of such act shall also be considered to have committed
the offence under this Section.
(6)

Where a person has been subjected to enforced

disappearance by two or more persons jointly, every person involved
in such act shall be equally liable as the offender.
(6)

A person who commits the offence referred to in sub-

section (1) shall be liable to the following sentence:
(a)

In the case of the principal offender of enforced
disappearance, a sentence of imprisonment for a
term not exceeding fifteen years and a fine not
exceeding five hundred thousand rupees, having
regard to the duration and circumstances of such
enforced disappearance,

132

(b)

In the case of a person who is accomplice or
conspires

to

the

commission

of

enforced

disappearance, the same sentence as is imposable
on the principal offender, and in the case of a
person who attempts to or facilitates the
commission of enforced disappearance, half the
sentence imposable on the principal offender.
(8)

A person who does an act constituting the offence

referred to in sub-section (1) against a woman or child shall be liable
to an additional sentence of imprisonment for a term of two years, in
addition to the sentence to be imposed pursuant to sub-section (7).
(9)

Where a person has committed any other offence

punishable by law against any one who has been subjected to
enforced disappearance, during such disappearance, he or she shall
be liable to the additional sentence under this Section, in addition to
the sentence imposable by law for such offence.
(10) A

person

who

subjects

any

one

to

enforced

disappearance by using any government vehicle, building, arms and
ammunition or goods shall be liable to an additional sentence of
imprisonment for a term of one year, in addition to the sentence
imposable under this Section.
207. Forfeiture of goods related to offence: Any building, land, vehicle,
arms and other goods knowingly allowed by the owner thereof to be
used in, or used with the consent of the concerned owner in, the
commission of the offence punishable under this Chapter shall be
forfeited.

133

Provided that no governmental building, vehicle, arms and
goods shall be forfeited.
208. Entitlement to compensation: Where a person who is subjected to
enforced disappearance appears or is made public subsequently, he
or she shall be entitled to get a reasonable compensation from the
person who has so subjected him or her to enforced disappearance.
(2)

Where the person subjected to enforced disappearance

is already dead, the immediate successor to him or her shall be
entitled to get the compensation referred to in sub-section (1).
209. Property to be returned: Where any person, in subjecting another
person to enforced disappearance under this Chapter, has also taken
any property belonging to that other person, the person who has so
subjected to enforced disappearance shall return such property, if
available, and pay a reasonable compensation for such property, if
not available, to the disappeared person or his or her immediate
relative.
210. Statute of limitation: No complaint shall be entertained after expiry
of six months from the date of having knowledge of commission of
the offence under this Chapter or from the date of the disappeared
person getting or being made public.
Provided that if a complaint is filed, accompanied by the
evidence, with the leave of the court, setting out the reason for not
being in a position to file the complaint, such complaint may lie at
any time.

134

Chapter-17
Offences Relating to Kidnapping or Taking of Hostages
211. Prohibition of kidnapping: (1) No person shall kidnap, or cause to
be kidnapped, another person.
(2)

For the purposes of sub-section (1), a person shall be

considered to have committed kidnapping if he or she does any of
the following acts:
(a)

To take any person to or compel him or her to go to any
place by using force or threats to use force or by
practicing fraud, deception or intimidation or by
showing or not showing arms or by misrepresenting or
by administering narcotics or alcoholic substance to him
or her or by seizing or controlling in any way a vehicle
by which he or she is travelling or exercising control in
any way over such vehicle, or

(b)

To take by force any person to any place without his or
her consent or any child or any person who is under
shelter of any one due to his or her physical incapacity
or any person of unsound mind due to mental illness
without the consent of his or her father, mother or
guardian or by way of misrepresentation.

212.

Prohibition of hostage-taking: (1) No person shall take another
person hostage.
(2)

For the purposes of sub-section (1), a person shall be

considered to have committed hostage-taking if that person seizes or
detains another person without his or her consent or a child or a

135

person of unsound mind without the consent of his or her father,
mother or guardian, by using force or threats to use force, or by
practicing fraud, deception, coercion or intimidation or by showing
or not showing arms or by misrepresenting or by administering
narcotics or alcoholic substance to him or her or by seizing or
controlling a vehicle or place where he or she is staying.
(3)

Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (2),

placing, in good faith, an unsound person under the surveillance or
control of any one in the course of treatment or for any other
purpose, for the benefit of the concerned person, with the consent of
his or her father, mother or guardian shall not be deemed to
constitute hostage-taking.
213. Punishment for kidnapping or hostage-taking: A person who
does, or causes to be done, any act referred to in Section 211 or 212
shall be liable to a sentence of imprisonment for a term of seven to
ten years and a fine of seventy-five thousand to one hundred
thousand rupees if the person does, or causes to be done, such act
with the intention of causing death, causing injury by subjecting to
hurt, committing rape or unnatural sex, trafficking or enslaving, or
subjecting to forced labor, engaging into prostitution, subjecting to
torture, compelling to do or cause to be done any act, taking ransom
or compelling to do any other act which constitutes any offence
under the law in force, and to a sentence of imprisonment for a term
of three to five years and a fine of thirty thousand to fifty thousand
rupees if the person does, or causes to be done, such act for any other
purpose.

136

214. Additional sentence to be imposed: (1) A person who takes another
person hostage under Section 212 after kidnapping him or her under
Section 211 shall be liable to a sentence of imprisonment for a term
of ten to fifteen years and a fine of one hundred thousand to one
hundred fifty thousand rupees.
(2)

A person who does any other act considered to be an

offence under this Act or under the law in force by committing
kidnapping or hostage-taking shall be liable to the sentence referred
to in sub-section (1), in addition to the sentence imposable for such
offence.
(3)

Where the offence referred to in Sections 211 and 212 is

committed, or cause to be committed, in an organized manner, the
persons committing such offence shall be liable to an additional
sentence of imprisonment for a term of two years.
215. Person who abets or orders or attempts or conspires or is
accomplice to be liable to sentence: (1) A person who abets or
orders the commission of any offence referred to in this Chapter shall
be liable to the same sentence as is imposable on the principal
offender.
(2)

Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1),

the person who attempts or conspires to commit or is accomplice to
the commission of such act shall be liable to half the sentence
imposable for that offence.
216. Reduction of sentence if surrendered: Where a person committing
an offence under this Chapter surrenders before the security
personnel at the time of committing the offence or renders assistance

137

in arresting the other offenders or members of the gang committing
that offence, the court may, having regard to the circumstances,
reduce the sentence for that person.
217. Compensation ordered to be paid: (1) A reasonable compensation
shall be ordered to be paid to the victim by the person who is held to
have committed or caused the commission of any offence under this
Chapter.
(2)

The compensation referred to in sub-section (1) shall be

paid to the immediate successor to the victim if the victim is already
dead.
218. Statute of limitation: (1) There shall be no statute of limitation for
making a complaint in the case of any offence under this Chapter
which has caused the death of any one.
(2)

No complaint shall lie after the expiry of two years after

the date of commission of any offence under this Chapter other than
that set forth in sub-section (1), and after the expiry of six months
after the date of release of the concerned person from such offence in
the case of any of the offences under Sections 211 and 212.

138

Chapter-18
Sexual Offences
219. Prohibition of committing rape: (1) No one shall commit rape.
(2)

Where a man has sexual intercourse with a woman

without her consent or with a girl child below eighteen years of age
even with her consent, the man shall be considered to commit rape
on such woman or girl child.
Explanation: For the purposes of this Chapter,(a)

Consent obtained by way of coercion, undue influence,
intimidation, threat, misrepresentation, or kidnapping or
taking of hostage shall not be considered to be consent,

(b)

Consent obtained at the time of being of unsoundness of
mind shall not be considered to be consent,

(c)

The penetration of penis into anus or mouth, penetration
of penis, to any extent, into anus, mouth or vagina,
insertion of any object other than penis into vagina shall
also be considered to be rape.

(3)

A person who commits rape shall be liable to the

sentence of imprisonment as follows, having regard to the
circumstances of such sexual intercourse and the age of woman:
(a)

Imprisonment for a term of sixteen to twenty years, if
she is a girl child below ten years of age,

(b)

Imprisonment for a term of fourteen to sixteen years, if
she is a girl child who is ten years or above ten years of
age but below fourteen years of age,

139

(c)

Imprisonment for a term of twelve to fourteen years, if
she is a girl child who is fourteen or above fourteen
years of age but below sixteen years of age,

(d)

Imprisonment for a term of ten to twelve years, if the
woman is sixteen or above sixteen years of age but
below eighteen years of age,

(e)

Imprisonment for a term of seven to ten years, if the
woman is eighteen or above eighteen years of age.

(4)

Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (3),

if the husband commits rape on his wife during the existence of
marital relationship between them, he shall be liable to a sentence of
imprisonment for a term not exceeding five years.
Provided that the following situation shall not be considered as
the existence of marital relationship:
(a)

A case of partition has been instituted upon
making separation of board and bread,

(b)

The wife has lived separate upon taking her
partition share from the husband,

(c)

A case of divorce from the husband has been
instituted.

(5)

In the case of the situation referred to in sub-section (4),

the court may, if it is necessary to do so upon a petition by the
victim, order the husband to do the following:
(a)

To allow the wife to reside in the same house
where she has resided, to provide her with food

140

and clothes, not to hurt her and to behave her
politely and decently,
(b)

To get the wife to have required medical
treatment or provide reasonable amount for her
treatment,

(c)

To arrange a separate residence for the husband if
it is not appropriate for them to reside in the same
place together and make necessary arrangement
for the maintenance of the wife while so residing
separately,

(d)

To refraining from doing act causing suffering or
annoyance, in any manner, to the wife and do, or
cause to be done, necessary and appropriate act
for the interest and security of the wife.

(6)

Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1),

a man who commits rape in spite of knowing that he has human
immune deficiency virus (HIV positive) or a sexually transmitted
disease shall be liable to the following additional sentence, in
addition to the sentence set forth in sub-section (3):
(a)

The sentence referred to in Section 105 in the
event of the commission of rape in spite of
knowing that he has human immune deficiency
virus (HIV positive),

(b)

A sentence of imprisonment for a term not
exceeding three years and a fine not exceeding
thirty thousand rupees in the event of the

141

commission of rape in spite of knowing that he
has any other sexually transmitted disease.
(7)

A man who commits rape on a woman in a gang or on a

woman having pregnancy of more than six months or on a woman
who is infirm or disabled or suffering from physical or mental
illness, or commits rape showing arms shall be liable to an additional
sentence of imprisonment for a term not exceeding five years, in
addition to the sentence set forth in sub-section (3).
(8)

A person who commits rape on a woman within the

prohibited degree of relationship by consanguinity or affinity shall be
liable to the sentence referred to in this Chapter, in addition to the
sentence imposable for incest if he is liable to such sentence for
incest.
220. Prohibition of incest: (1) No person shall have sexual intercourse
with another person knowingly that such person is one falling within
the prohibited degree of relationship by consanguinity or affinity for
marriage according to the usage, custom or tradition being practiced
in his or her caste or lineage.
(2)

A person who commits the offence referred to in sub-

section (1) in the following relationship shall be liable to the
following sentence:
(a)

A sentence of imprisonment for life in the case of
sexual intercourse between the natural mother
and her natural son or between the natural father
and his natural daughter,

142

(b)

A sentence of imprisonment for a term of four
years to ten years and a fine of forty thousand
rupees to one hundred thousand rupees in the case
of sexual intercourse between the step-mother
and her step-son, between the step father and his
step daughter, between the full blood elder sister
and brother, between full blood elder brother and
sister, between father-in-law and daughter-in-law
within the same branch, between grand-father and
grand-daughter or great-grand-daughter within
the same branch, between elder brother-in-law
and sister-in-law within the same branch or
between younger brother-in-law and sister-in-law
within the same branch,

(c)

A sentence of imprisonment for a term of three to
six years and a fine of thirty thousand to sixty
thousand rupees in the case of sexual intercourse
between grand-mother and her grand-son or
great-grand-son within the three generations of
the same branch, between father's elder brother or
uncle and niece within the same branch, between
nephew and great mother (wife of own father's
brother) or aunty within the same branch,
between father-in-law and brother's daughter-inlaw within the same branch, between uterine
maternal uncle and niece or nephew and maternal
aunty, between mother's elder sister or younger

143

sister and nephew or between mother-in-law
(one's wife side) and son-in-law,
(d)

A sentence of imprisonment for a term of one
year to three years and a fine of ten thousand to
thirty thousand rupees, having regard to, inter
alia, the branch, relationship and generation, in
the case of sexual intercourse between persons in
other relationship within seven generations of
one’s own clan except that referred to in clause
(a), (b) or (c).

221. Prohibition of sexual intercourse with detainee: (1) No
government employee shall have sexual intercourse with a person
held in prison or detention or facilitate or create circumstances for
the commission by another person of sexual intercourse with such
person.
(2)

A person who commits, or causes to be committed,

sexual intercourse referred to in sub-section (1) shall be liable to a
sentence of imprisonment for a term not exceeding three years, and if
such sexual intercourse is an offence under this Act or other law also,
the sentence referred to in this Section shall be added to the sentence
under such law.
222. Prohibition of sexual intercourse with person in one's own
protection or security: (1) No person shall have, or aid another
person to have, sexual intercourse with any person in his or her
protection, security or custody, and no office-bearer or employee of
any organization providing treatment or rehabilitation services to
persons of unsound mind or suffering from physical or mental illness

144

shall have sexual intercourse with any person held in such
organization.
(2)

A person who commits the offence referred to in sub-

section (1) shall be liable to a sentence of imprisonment for a term
not exceeding three years, and if such sexual intercourse is an
offence under this Act or other law also, the sentence referred to in
this Section shall be added to the sentence under such law.
223. Prohibition of sexual intercourse with person in office or
receiving professional service: (1) No employee serving in a
government office or private office or person providing any
professional service or commercial work shall have, or aid another
person to have, sexual intercourse with a person serving in such
office or a person making contact or being in contact for such service
or work, while performing functions of such office or providing such
service or at the place where such service is provided.
(2)

A person who commits the offence referred to in sub-

section (1) shall be liable to a sentence of imprisonment for a term
not exceeding four years and a fine not exceeding forty thousand
rupees, and if such sexual intercourse is an offence under this Act or
other law also, the sentence referred to in this Section shall be added
to the sentence under such law.
224. Prohibition of sexual harassment: (1) No person shall commit, or
caused to be committed, sexual harassment to another person.
(2)

A person shall be considered to commit sexual

harassment if the person holds or touches or attempts to touch any
sensitive organ of, or opens or attempts to open undergarments of, or

145

obstructs or hinders in any way the wearing or removing of
undergarments of, or takes to any lonely place in an unusual manner,
or gets his or her sexual organ to be touched or held by, or uses
vulgar or similar other words, spoken or written or by gesture or by
way of electronic medium, or shows any pornography to, or teases or
annoys with sexual motive, or behaves in an unusual, undesirable or
indecent manner with, a person who is not his wife or her husband,
without her or his consent, with the motive of having sexual
intercourse with her or him.
(2)

A person who commits the offence referred to in sub-

section (1) shall be liable to a sentence of imprisonment for a term
not exceeding three years and a fine not exceeding thirty thousand
rupees.
225. Prohibition of child sexual abuse: (1) No person shall commit, or
cause to be committed, child sexual abuse.
(2)

A person shall be considered to commit child sexual

abuse if the person takes to any lonely place in an unusual manner,
or holds or touches any sexual organ of, gets his or her sexual organ
to be touched or held by, or makes any form of unusual sexual
behavior with, a child, with the motive of having sexual intercourse
with the child.
(3)

A person who commits the offence referred to in sub-

section (1) shall be liable to a sentence of imprisonment for a term
not exceeding three years and a fine not exceeding thirty thousand
rupees.

146

226. Prohibition of unnatural sexual intercourse: (1) No person shall
have, or cause to be had, unnatural sexual intercourse with another
person without his or her consent.
Explanation: For the purposes of this sub-section, consent
given by a child shall not be considered to be consent.
(2)

A person who commits the offence referred to in sub-

section (1) shall be liable to a sentence of imprisonment for a term
not exceeding three years and a fine not exceeding thirty thousand
rupees.
(3)

A person who commits the offence referred to in sub-

section (1) against a child shall be liable to the sentence under
Section 219.
227. Prohibition of bestiality: (1) No person shall have, or cause to be
had, sexual intercourse with an animal.
(2)

A person who commits the offence referred to in sub-

section (4) shall be liable to a sentence of imprisonment for a term
not exceeding two years and a fine not exceeding twenty thousand
rupees, if the person has committed, or caused to be committed,
sexual intercourse with a cow, and to a sentence of imprisonment for
a term not exceeding one year and a fine not exceeding ten thousand
rupees, in the case of sexual intercourse with any other animal.
228. Compensation ordered to be paid: A reasonable compensation
shall be ordered to be paid to the victim of any offence referred to in
this Chapter other than the offences under Sections 220 and 226.

147

229. Statute of limitation: (1) There shall be no statute of limitation for
making a complaint in relation to the case of any offence under
Section 220.
(2)

No complaint shall lie after the expiry of one year from

the date of commission of any of the offences under Sections 219,
221, 222, 223, 224 and 225 and sub-section (3) of Section 226, and
after the expiry of three months from the date of knowledge of
commission of any of the other offences under this Chapter.
Provided that where the offence is committed against a person
held in detention, taken into control, kidnapped or taken hostage, no
complaint shall lie after the expiry of three months from the date of
release from such detention, control, kidnapping or hostage-taking.

148

Chapter-19
Offence Relating to Medical Treatment
230. Prohibition of conducting medical treatment by person who has
not obtained licence: (1) No person, other than a person who has,
upon having acquired the specified educational qualification in
medicines, obtained from the lawful competent authority a licence
for medical treatment, shall provide medical services to, carry out
surgery on any organ of human body of, administer or prescribe any
kind of drug to, or otherwise conduct medical treatment of, any
person.
(2)

Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1),

nothing shall bar a person who has gained knowledge on medical
treatment from a long experience from administering, with due care,
such drug of general nature to a patient suffering from a minor
disease as not causing any specific adverse impact on any human
organ of such patient, or conducting medical treatment by
conducting operation of a minor wound, ecthyma.
(3)

A person who commits, or causes to be committed, the

offence referred to in sub-section (1) shall be liable to a sentence of
imprisonment for a term not exceeding three years and a fine not
exceeding thirty thousand rupees.
(4)

The offender shall be liable to the sentence of

imprisonment for life where any act of providing medical service,
conducting surgery or administering drug in contravention of subsection (1) causes the death of any person, and to a sentence of

149

imprisonment for a term not exceeding fifteen years where such act
causes grievous hurt.
231. Prohibition of conducting medical treatment maliciously: (1) No
person shall, with the intention of causing death of, or grievous hurt
to, another person, carry out his or her treatment, conduct one type of
medical treatment of him or her instead of another type of treatment
as required, or administer, or prescribe for administration of, any
drug to him or her knowingly or having reason to believe that the
administration or prescription of such drug may cause death of, or
grievous hurt, to him or her or conduct surgery on one organ of
human body of him or her instead of another organ as required or
make such organ dysfunctional or separate such organ from the
human body, or cause the commission of any of such acts.
(2)

A person who commits, or causes to be committed, the

offence referred to in sub-section (1) shall be liable to the following
sentence:
(a)

The same sentence as imposable for murder, in the case
of causing the death of any person,

(a)

The same sentence as imposable for grievous hurt, in
the case of causing grievous heart to any person.

232. Prohibition of conducting medical treatment by recklessness or
negligence: (1) No person authorized under law to conduct medical
treatment shall, in conducting medical treatment of any one, conduct
such treatment, administer any drug or prescribe for the
administration of drug to him or her in a reckless or negligent
manner, without taking adequate care or precaution.

150

(2)

Where any act referred to in sub-section (1) causes

death of or grievous hurt to any one, the offender shall be liable to a
sentence of imprisonment for a term not exceeding five years and a
fine not exceeding fifty thousand rupees if the death or grievous hurt
has been caused from a reckless act and to a sentence of
imprisonment for a term not exceeding three years and a fine not
exceeding thirty thousand rupees if the death or grievous hurt has
been caused from a negligent act.
233. Prohibition of carrying out experiment on human body without
consent: (1) No person authorized under law to conduct medical
treatment shall, in carrying out an experiment of any method relating
to medical treatment, surgery or drug on the human body, carry out
such experiment, without obtaining consent of the concerned person,
and, in the case of a child or person of unsound mind, without
obtaining consent of his or her father, mother or guardian, and
without giving information thereof to such person, father, mother or
guardian.
(2)

Any experiment referred to in sub-section (1) shall be

carried out carefully, having regard to, inter alia, the possible effects
of such method, surgery or drug on human body.
(3)

No person shall carry out physical examination of or

alter any organ of any one, or cause the commission of such act, with
intention to get any undue economic benefit or to breach the privacy
of a woman or with any other intention.
(4)

A person who carries out, or causes to be carried out,

any experiment in contravention of sub-section (1), (2) or (3) shall be

151

liable to a sentence of imprisonment for a term not exceeding three
years and a fine not exceeding thirty thousand rupees.
(5)

The offender shall be liable to the same sentence as

imposable for murder if the offence referred to in sub-section (1), (2)
or (3) causes the death of any one and to the same sentence as
imposable for grievous hurt if such offence causes grievous hurt to
any one.
234. Prohibition of selling dangerous drug: (1) No person authorized to
sell medicines as per law shall, without prescription of the person
authorized under law to carry out treatment as per law, sell or
distribute any narcotic, toxic or dangerous drug that may cause
serious impact on human body.
(2)

A person who commits, or causes to be committed, the

offence referred to in sub-section (1) shall be liable to a sentence of
imprisonment for a term not exceeding two years or a fine not
exceeding twenty thousand rupees or both the sentences.
235. Prohibition of adulteration of drugs or sale of adulterated drugs:
(1) No person shall knowingly adulterate any drug in such a manner
as to void or lessen or change the efficacy of such drug or make it
noxious or sell such adulterated drug or any other thing saying that it
is a drug or issue such drug or thing to any one for treatment or
administer, or cause to be administered, such drug to any one.
(2)

A person who commits the offence referred to in sub-

section (1) shall be liable to the following sentence:

152

(a)

The same sentence as imposable for murder, in
the case of death caused from the consumption of
such drug,

(b)

The same sentence as imposable for attempted
murder, in the case of danger or likelihood of
danger

to

cause

death

caused

from

the

consumption of such drug,
(c)

A sentence of imprisonment for a term not
exceeding ten years and a fine not exceeding one
hundred thousand rupees, in the case of any
grievous hurt or deterioration or deprivation of
power of any organ of the body caused from the
consumption of such drug,

(d)

A sentence of imprisonment for a term not
exceeding five years and a fine not exceeding
fifty thousand rupees in cases other than that
referred to in clause (a), (b), or (c).

236. Prohibition of selling, distributing date-expired drugs or without
taking precaution: (1) No person shall sell any drug required to be
used within a certain time period after the expiry of such date or sell,
distribute any drug without taking any specific precaution if such
precaution must be taken in the sale or distribution of such drug.
(2)

A person who commits, or causes to be committed, the

offence referred to in sub-section (1) shall be liable to a sentence of
imprisonment for a term not exceeding one year and a fine not
exceeding ten thousand rupees.

153

237. Prohibition of selling, distributing of drug as a different drug:
(1) No person authorized to sell or distribute any drug under law
shall, while so selling or distributing the drug, sell or distribute a
drug of one type as a drug of another type knowingly or having
reasonable reason to know that such drug is materially a different
type of drug.
(2)

A person who commits, or causes to be committed, the

offence referred to in sub-section (1) shall be liable to a sentence of
imprisonment for a term not exceeding two years or a fine not
exceeding twenty thousand rupees or both the sentences.
238. Prohibition of giving false report: (1) No person licensed under
law to conduct a pathological test of human blood, urine, sputum etc.
shall give a fake or false report while conducting such test or give a
report stating the facts different than that found from the test.
(2)

A person who commits, or causes to be committed, the

offence referred to in sub-section (1) shall be liable to a sentence of
imprisonment for a term not exceeding three years and a fine not
exceeding thirty thousand rupees.
(3)

Where the consumption of any drug prescribed to,

conduction of a surgery on, or treatment of, a person on the basis of
the report referred to in sub-section (1) causes the death of or any
grievous hurt to such person, the person giving such report shall be
deemed to be the offender.
(4)

A person who commits, or causes to be committed, the

offence referred to in sub-section (3) shall be liable to the same
sentence as imposable for murder, in the case of causing death of,

154

and to the same sentence as imposable for grievous hurt, in the case
of causing grievous heart to, any person.
239. Compensation to be paid: (1) Where the death of, or grievous hurt
to, or other harm, injury or damage to, any person is caused from the
commission of any offence referred to in this Chapter, reasonable
compensation shall be ordered to be paid by the offender to the
concerned victim and to his or her successor if the victim is dead.
240. Statute of limitation: (1) There shall be no statute of limitation for
filing a complaint if death is caused from any of the acts referred to
in sub-section (4) of Section 230, Section 231, Section 232, subsection (4) of Section 233, Section 235, and sub-section (4) of
Section 238.
(2)

No complaint shall lie after one year from the date of

knowledge of commission of the offence under sub-section (1) of
Section 230, and after six months from the date of commission of
any of the other offences under this Chapter.

155

Chapter-20
Offences Relating to Theft and Robbery
241. Prohibition of theft: (1) No person shall commit, or cause to be
committed, theft.
(2)

For the purposes of sub-section (1), a person who

dishonestly takes any property under the ownership, possession,
control or custody of another person out of such ownership,
possession, control or custody or moves such property without that
other person's consent, with the intention of owning, using or
enjoying it, shall be considered to commit theft.
Explanation: For the purposes of this Section,(a)

The term "consent" means the consent given in writing
or orally or expressed by conduct.

(b)

Consent by a child who has not attained eighteen years
of age or a person of unsound mind shall not be
considered to be consent.

242. Punishment for theft: (1) A person who commits, or causes to be
committed, theft in any of the following circumstances shall be liable
to a sentence of imprisonment from a term of two to seven years and
a fine of twenty thousand to seventy thousand rupees:
(a)

In the case of theft of any government or public
property or property of any religious place or temple,

(b)

In the case of theft of any property, upon administering
liquor or narcotics to, or otherwise making unconscious,
any person,

156

(c)

In the case of theft of any property, upon taking
advantage of earthquake, fire, flood, riot or similar other
situation of crisis or any accident,

(d)

In the case of theft of any property of the office or
person whose service one is engaged in,

(e)

In the case of theft on a vehicle used for the conveyance
of human persons or goods.

(2)

A person who commits, or causes to be committed, theft

in any circumstance other than that referred to in sub-section (1)
shall be liable to a sentence of imprisonment for a term not
exceeding three years and a fine not exceeding thirty thousand
rupees.
243. Prohibition of burglary (Nakabajani): (1) No person shall commit,
or cause to be committed, burglary.
(2)

For the purposes of sub-section (1), a person shall be

considered to commit burglary if he or she commits theft in a house
by entering into the house by breaking its main gate or by using any
passage, place, method or means other than the main gate, or after
committing theft, he or she quits, or attempts to quit, by breaking its
main gate or by using any passage, place, method or means other
than the main gate.
(3)

A person who commits the offence referred to in sub-

section (1) shall be liable to a sentence of imprisonment for a term of
three to five years and a fine of thirty thousand to fifty thousand
rupees.

157

244. Prohibition of robbery: (1) No person shall commit, or cause to be
committed, robbery.
(2)

A person shall be deemed to commit robbery if he or

(a)

causes or attempts to cause to any person death or hurt

she:

or restraint or obstruction or fear or intimidation of
instant death or of instant hurt, in order to the
committing of theft or in committing the theft or in
carrying away property obtained by the theft or to the
escaping of arrest after the commission of the theft or
commits theft carrying a deadly weapon,
(b)

obtains any money or economic benefit through
criminal extortion by putting any person in fear of
instant death or of instant or of instant restraint,

(c)

commits theft by waiting near or on way, road, lonely
place or forest or show of fear or intimidation , using or
threatening to use a deadly weapon,

(d)

commits theft in a group of three or more persons.

(3)

A person who commits the offence referred to in sub-

section (1) shall be liable to the following sentence:
(a)

A sentence of imprisonment for a term of seven to
fourteen years and a fine of seventy thousand to one
hundred forty thousand rupees, in the case of the
offence referred to in clause (a) or (b) of sub-section (2),

(b)

A sentence of imprisonment for a term of five to ten
years and a fine of fifty thousand to one hundred

158

thousand rupees, in the case of the offence referred to in
clause (c) or (d) of sub-section (2).
245. Prohibition of movement carrying tools to be used in commission
of theft: (1) No person shall, with the intention of committing theft
or robbery, move around or enter into or attempt to enter into the
house of any person carrying instruments such as any tool, object,
arms, duplicate key, gloves and ladder that may be used in the
commission of theft or robbery.
(2)

A person who so moves, enters into or attempts to enter

into as referred to in sub-section (1) shall, unless otherwise proved,
be considered to have moved, entered into or attempted to enter into,
with the intention of committing theft.
(3)

A person who commits, or causes to be committed, the

offence referred to in sub-section (1) shall be liable to a sentence of
imprisonment for a term not exceeding one year or a fine not
exceeding ten thousand rupees or both the sentences.
246.

Prohibition of pickpocketing: (1) No person shall commit, or
cause to be committed, pickpocketing.
(2)

For the purposes of sub-section (1), a person who steals

cash or property from the pocket of another person who is walking
on foot, traveling on a vehicle or staying in a public place or from his
or her accompanying purse, bag or means of any other kind, with or
without notice of such other person, shall be considered to commit
pickpocketing.
Provided that where a person pick-pockets a cash amount of
more than ten thousand rupees or property valued at more than ten

159

thousand rupees, the person shall be considered to commit the
offence referred to in Section 241.
(3)

A person who commits the offence referred to in sub-

section (1) shall be liable to the following sentence:
(a)

A sentence of imprisonment for a term not exceeding
one month or a fine equal to the claimed amount or both
the sentences, in the case of the commission of
pickpocketing for the first time,

(b)

A sentence of imprisonment for a term not exceeding
two months or a fine equal to the claimed amount or
both the sentences, for each instance from the second
time onwards.

247. Claimed amount to be recovered: The claimed amount, if any,
involved in the offence referred to in this Chapter shall be forfeited
from the offender of such offence and paid to the owner of that
property. If the offender has already spent the property formed of the
claimed amount, property equal to the value of claimed amount shall
be ordered to be paid to the owner.
248. Statute of limitation: No complaint shall lie after the expiry of three
months from the date of commission of the offence in the case of any
of the offences under Sections 245 and 246 and after six months
from the date of knowledge of commission of the offence in the case
of any of the other offences under this Chapter.

160

Chapter-21
Offences Relating to Cheating, Criminal Breach of Trust and
Extortion
249. Prohibition of cheating: (1) No person shall commit, or cause to be
committed, cheating.
(2)

For the purposes of sub-section (1), a person who

dishonestly causes any kind of loss, damage or injury to another
person whom he or she makes believe in some matter or to any other
person or obtains any benefit for him or her or any one else by
omitting to do as per such belief or by inducement, fraudulent,
dishonest or otherwise deceptive act or preventing such other person
from doing any act shall be considered to commit cheating.
Explanation: Where the victim of cheating has got a deed
executed by the cheater, the deed shall apply to that matter.
(3)

A person who commits the offence referred to in sub-

section (1) shall be liable to the following sentence:
(a)

A sentence of imprisonment for a term not exceeding
ten years and a fine not exceeding one hundred
thousand rupees, in the case of cheating the Government
of Nepal or any body under full or majority ownership
or control of the Government of Nepal, except in cases
of corruption,

(b)

A sentence of imprisonment for a term not exceeding
five years and a fine not exceeding fifty thousand
rupees, in the case of cheating by lying one's name,
designation, title, qualification,

161

(c)

A sentence of imprisonment for a term not exceeding
seven years and a fine not exceeding seventy thousand
rupees in the cases of any kind of cheating other than
that referred to in clause (a) or (b).

(4)

A sentence of imprisonment for a term not exceeding

one year, in addition to the sentence set forth in sub-section (3), shall
be imposed in the case of cheating a child, person of unsound mind,
helpless, illiterate or person above seventy-five years of age.
250. Prohibition of causing difference in bid or contract: (1) No
person who has undertaken the responsibility of carrying out any
construction related work or other work or other person who acts on
his or her behalf shall, with dishonest intent, carry out, or cause to be
carried out, the construction or other work, by not using the materials
of the specified standards or quality or by altering the quantity of the
materials to be used or otherwise using materials not conforming to
the specified quality.
(2)

A person who commits the offence referred to in sub-

section (3) shall be liable to a sentence of imprisonment for a term
not exceeding ten years and a fine not exceeding one hundred
thousand rupees.
(3)

No person who has undertaken the responsibility of

supplying any materials, goods or services or other person who acts
on his or her behalf shall, with dishonest intent, supply materials,
goods or services falling short of the quality or quantity or otherwise
provide materials, goods or services not conforming to the specified
quality.

162

(4)

A person who commits, or causes to be committed, the

offence referred to in sub-section (3) shall be liable to a sentence of
imprisonment for a term not exceeding five years and a fine not
exceeding fifty thousand rupees.
251. Prohibition of criminal misappropriation of property: (1) No
person shall make, or cause to be made, criminal misappropriation of
property.
(2)

For the purposes of sub-section (1), a person who does

any of the following acts shall be considered to commit criminal
misappropriation of property:
(a)

To dishonestly possess and use, cause loss and damage
to or misappropriate a property belonging to another
person or rent, sell or dispose it without consent of that
other person.
Provided that if the real owner of an adjoining
land uses the property belonging to another person, by
mistakenly making normal encroachment of the
boundary, he or she shall not be considered to commit
the offence referred to in this clause.

(b)

To dishonestly appropriate or otherwise convert any
property not in the possession of any other person to his
or her own use, knowing or having the means of
discovering the owner of such property, or without
returning such property to such owner within a
reasonable time, or without giving notice to the owner to

163

claim the property or without waiting the owner of such
property until a reasonable time.
Provided that where the finder in good faith
appropriates a property to his or her own use when the
owner of the property is not discovered despite
reasonable efforts or the owner does not claim the
property within a reasonable time after the giving of
notice, he or she shall not be considered to commit the
offence referred to in this Section.
(3)

A person who commits, or causes to be committed, the

offence referred to in sub section (1) shall be liable to the following
sentence:
(a)

A sentence of imprisonment for a term not exceeding
three years or a fine not exceeding thirty thousand
rupees or both the sentences, in the case of criminal
misappropriation of property which was in the
possession of a deceased person at the time of that
person's demise and has not since been in the possession
of

his

or

her

legal

successor,

or

criminal

misappropriation of property belonging to a child, a
person of unsound mind due to mental or physical
illness, or a person above seventy-five years of age,
(b)

A sentence of imprisonment for a term not exceeding
one year or a fine not exceeding ten thousand rupees or
both

the

sentences,

in

the

case

of

criminal

misappropriation of property in cases other than that set
forth in clause (a).

164

(4)

If any property subjected to criminal misappropriation

under this Section is in a returnable condition, the person who so
misappropriates shall return the property to the concerned owner or
to his or her immediate successor if the owner is dead.
252. Prohibition of criminal breach of trust: (1) No person shall
commit, or cause to be committed, criminal breach of trust.
(2)

For the purposes of sub-section (1), a person who does

any of the following acts shall be considered to commit, or cause the
commission of, criminal breach of trust:
(a)

To dishonestly appropriate or otherwise convert to his
or her own use other's property which is under his or her
custody or protection or to dishonestly appropriate such
property in his or her own use, or allow such property to
be used by, or dispose, or cause the disposal, of such
property to, another person, in violation of any contract,
deed of conditions or law concerning the use of such
property,

(b)

To cause any loss, damage or injury by a person, who is
entrusted with responsibility or has lawful duty of doing
any work or transaction of another person or who acts as
an agent of another in relation to any work or
transaction, to that other person by doing any act in
violation of his or her duty with the intention of causing
benefit to himself or herself or any one else.

165

(3)

A person who commits, or causes to be committed, the

offence referred to in sub-section (1) shall be liable to the following
sentence:
(a)

A sentence of imprisonment for a term not exceeding
five years and a fine not exceeding fifty thousand
rupees, in the case of the commission of criminal breach
of trust by a person in the capacity of manager, director,
employee or agent of any organization or by a person
entrusted with the responsibility of carrying a property
from one place to another or keeping it safely in a
warehouse or any other place or with a legal duty to do
so,

(b)

A sentence of imprisonment for a term not exceeding
three years or a fine not exceeding thirty thousand
rupees or both the sentences, in the case of the
commission of criminal breach of trust by any person
other than that set forth in clause (a).

253. Prohibition of extortion: (1) No person shall commit, or cause to be
committed, extortion.
(2)

For the purposes of sub-section (1), a person who puts

any person in fear or terror of any injury to that person or to any
other person and dishonestly takes any benefit from that person for
himself or herself or any other person or induces that person to do, or
prevents that person from doing, any act with the intention of taking
such benefit shall be considered to commit extortion.

166

(3)

A person who commits the offence referred to in sub-

section (1) shall be liable to the following sentence:
(a)

A sentence of imprisonment for a term not exceeding
seven years and a fine not exceeding seventy thousand
rupees, in the case of putting a person in fear or terror of
death, grievous hurt or serious injury, with the intention
of committing extortion,

(b)

A sentence of imprisonment for a term not exceeding
three years and a fine not exceeding thirty thousand
rupees, in the case of commission of extortion by
showing fear or terror with the intention of causing any
damage to any other person's business or making a false
accusation in respect of such person's character,

(c)

A sentence of imprisonment for a term not exceeding
one year or a fine not exceeding ten thousand rupees or
both the sentences, in the case of the commission of
extortion in cases other than that set forth in clause (a)
or (b).

254.

Compensation: Where any injury or damage is caused to any
person from the commission of the offence referred to in this
Chapter, the claimed amount, if set out, and a reasonable
compensation, if the claimed amount is not set out, shall be ordered
to be paid by the offender to the victim.

255.

Statute of limitation: No complaint shall lie after the expiry of one
year from the date of knowledge of commission of any offence under
this Chapter.

167

Chapter-22
Offences Relating to Currency
256. Prohibition of counterfeiting currency: (1) No person shall
counterfeit, or attempt to counterfeit, any currency.
(2)

A person who commits, or causes to be committed, the

offence referred to in sub-section (1) shall be liable to a sentence of
imprisonment for a term of five to ten years and a fine of fifty
thousand to one hundred thousand rupees, having regard to the
quantity and value of the currency counterfeited.
Explanation: For the purpose of this Chapter,(a)

“currency” means any kind of currency note, postal
order, postal note, money order, cheque, draft, traveler's
cheque, letter of credit, letter of exchange, bond and
credit card, and this term also includes such other
similar kind of monetary instrument as specified by the
Bank, as required, by publishing and circulating a
public notice.

(b)

"counterfeit currency" means a currency which is so
forged in an unauthorized manner or counterfeit as
resembling or having reason to believe it to be a
currency issued by the Government of Nepal or Nepal
Rastra Bank or foreign government or competent
foreign body.

257. Prohibition of using counterfeit currency: (1) No person shall,
with the intention of using as genuine, purchase, sell, export, import,

168

transact, or use as genuine, any counterfeit currency or attempt to do
such act or possess such currency.

(2)

A person who commits the offence referred to in sub-

section (1) shall be liable to a sentence of imprisonment for a term
not exceeding seven years and a fine not exceeding seventy thousand
rupees.
258. Prohibition of making, possessing or repairing instruments for
counterfeiting currency: (1) No person shall make, repair,
purchase, sell, give, take, export, import or possess any instrument or
other material knowing that or having a reasonable reason to believe
that it is intended to be used in or for forging or counterfeiting
currency.
(2)

A person who commits, or causes to be committed, the

offence referred to in sub-section (1) shall be liable to a sentence of
imprisonment for a term not exceeding seven years and a fine not
exceeding seventy thousand rupees.
259. Prohibition of making currency contrary to standards: (1) No
authority or person entrusted by the law in force to make currency
shall knowingly make currency in contravention of the standards
specified by law, make currency in violation of the terms and
restrictions applicable to the making of currency, make currency in
excess of the quantity specified or do any act with the intention of
making currency with such deviation or cause benefit to himself or
herself or any other person from such act or facilitate such act.

169

(2)

A person who commits, or causes to be committed, the

offence referred to in sub-section (1) shall be liable to a sentence of
imprisonment for a term not exceeding seven years and a fine not
exceeding seventy thousand rupees.
260. Prohibition of taking outside currency making instruments: (1)
No person shall, except with the order of the competent authority
under law, take any currency making machinery, equipment or other
instrument out of the place where currency is made.
(2)

A person who commits, or causes to be committed, the

offence referred to in sub-section (1) shall be liable to a sentence of
imprisonment for a term not exceeding five years and a fine not
exceeding fifty thousand rupees.
261. Prohibition of diminishing weight or altering form of currency:
(1) No person shall diminish the weight of metallic currency or alter
the composition of metallic element or export, import or possess
currency, by causing the currency of one type to appear like the
currency of another type, with the intention of using it as genuine or
knowing that it may be used as genuine.
(2)

A person who commits, or causes to be committed, the

offence referred to in sub-section (1) shall be liable to a sentence of
imprisonment for a term not exceeding five years and a fine not
exceeding fifty thousand rupees.
262. Prohibition of bringing prohibited currency into use: (1) No
person shall bring into use, exchange or possess a currency in use but
circulation of which has been banned by order of the competent
authority under law, in violation of such order.

170

(2)

A person who commits, or causes to be committed, the

offence referred to in sub-section (1) shall be liable to a sentence of
imprisonment for a term not exceeding one year or a fine not
exceeding ten thousand rupees or both the sentences, and the
currency so brought into use, exchanged or possessed shall also be
forfeited.
263. Prohibition of burning, tearing, melting bank notes or coins or
writing on bank notes: (1) No person shall, except with the order of
the competent authority, burn a coin or bank note tendered as
currency or so melt or tear it that it is incapable of being used.
(2)

No person shall write on or cross off bank notes.

(3)

A person who commits, or causes to be committed, the

offence referred to in sub-section (1) or (2) shall be liable to a
sentence of imprisonment for a term not exceeding three months and
a fine not exceeding five thousand rupees.
264. Prohibition of misusing torn bank notes: (1)

No person who is

entrusted by order of the competent authority under law with a duty
of burning or disposing off the torn notes held to be burnt or
disposed of because such bank notes tendered as currency are worn
and torn or letters, signs or sizes are unrecognizable or such notes
cannot be brought into use for any other reason shall bring into use
such bank notes or refrain from burning or disposing of such notes or
give them to another person dishonestly intending to obtain any kind
of benefit therefrom.
(2)

A person who commits, or causes to be committed, the

offence referred to in sub-section (1) shall be liable to a sentence of

171

imprisonment for a term not exceeding three years and a fine not
exceeding thirty thousand rupees.
265. Forfeiture: The currency, machine, equipment or tools used in, and
materials related to, the commission of any offence under this
Chapter shall be forfeited
266. Statute of limitation: No complaint shall lie after the expiry of one
year from the date of knowledge of commission of any offence under
this Chapter.

172

Chapter-23
Offences Relating to Stamps
267. Prohibition of counterfeiting stamps or using counterfeit stamps:
(1) No person shall, with the intention of using as genuine,
counterfeit, attempt to counterfeit a stamp, purchase, sell, exchange,
export or import a counterfeit stamp, or use or attempt to use as
genuine, or possess, such stamp.
Explanation: For the purposes of this Chapter,(a)

"stamp" means a postal stamp or other revenue stamp
to be affixed to a document, and this term also includes
the sign of a stamp affixed to or printed on an envelope,
post letter or any other object or a sticker to be used for
the purpose of stamp.

(b)

"counterfeit stamp" means a forged stamp made in an
unauthorized manner so that it resembles a stamp
referred to in clause (a), and this term also includes a
stamp that has once been used.

(2)

A person who commits, or causes to be committed, the

offence referred to in sub-section (1) shall be liable to a sentence of
imprisonment for a term not exceeding five years and a fine not
exceeding fifty thousand rupees.
268. Prohibition of purchasing, selling, repairing instruments for
counterfeiting stamps: (1) No person shall make, repair, purchase,
sell, exchange, possess any machinery or other instrument knowing
or having reasonable ground to believe that it is intended to be used
for the purpose of counterfeiting any stamp.

173

(2)

A person who commits, or causes to be committed, the

offence referred to in sub-section (1) shall be liable to a sentence of
imprisonment for a term not exceeding five years and a fine not
exceeding fifty thousand rupees.
269. Prohibition of re-using stamp used before: (1) No person,
knowing that any stamp is a stamp already used before, shall re-use
as genuine such stamp or erase, efface or remove any seal or mark
put or impressed upon any stamp with the intention of using it as
genuine or attempt to do so.
(2)

A person who commits, or causes to be committed, the

offence referred to in sub-section (1) shall be liable to a sentence of
imprisonment for a term not exceeding one year or a fine not
exceeding ten thousand rupees or both the sentences.
270. Prohibition of removing from public document stamp used for
it: (1) No person shall remove, or attempt to remove, from a public
document a stamp which has been used for it.
(2)

A person who commits, or causes to be committed, the

offence referred to in sub-section (1) shall be liable to a sentence of
imprisonment for a term not exceeding six months or a fine not
exceeding five thousand rupees or both the sentences.
271. Forfeiture: Any stamp, tool, instrument or other material related to
the commission of any offence referred to in this Chapter shall be
forfeited.
272.

Statute of limitation: No complaint shall lie after the expiry of one
year from the date of knowledge of commission of any offence under
this Chapter.

174

Chapter-24
Offences Relating to Weights and Measures
273. Prohibition of making or using false instrument for weighing
and measuring: (1) No person shall make, or cause to be made, any
instrument for weighing, measuring or determining quality standards
in a manner that it does not conform to the specified standards or
knowingly use as genuine any instrument so made for weighing,
measuring or determining quality standards or possess or sell such
instrument which is intended to be so used or make false seal or
mark to be affixed to such instrument or tamper the seal or mark
affixed to the instrument for weighing, measuring or determining
quality standards or manipulate, with the help of any other
instrument, the weighing, measuring or quality determining ability of
such instrument or affix a false seal or mark to such instrument or,
by way of any other means, make any weight or measure different
from the prevalent one.
Explanation: For the purposes of this Section, the term
"instrument for weighing, measuring or determining quality
standards" means an instrument in use under the law to measure or
determine the unit, quality or quantity of any good or service or
purity or standards of such good or service or unit of any thing.
(2)

A person who commits, or causes to be committed, the

offence referred to in sub-section (1) shall be liable to a sentence of
imprisonment for a term not exceeding three years and a fine not
exceeding thirty thousand rupees.

175

(3)

Any instrument made or brought into use under sub-

section (1) and tool for making or repairing such instrument shall
also be forfeited.
274. Prohibition of fraudulent use of instrument for weighing,
measuring or determining quality standards: (1) In using the
instrument for weighing, measuring or determining quality standards
in the course of any business, transaction or trade, no person shall
fraudulently use such instrument in a manner to be different from the
weight, measure or standard specified for use or, with the help of any
other instrument or means, cause adverse effect to the weighing,
measuring or quality determination by such instrument as per the
prevailing weights and measures.
(2)

A person who commits, or causes to be committed, the

offence referred to in sub-section (1) shall be liable to a sentence of
imprisonment for a term not exceeding three years and a fine not
exceeding thirty thousand rupees.
275. Statute of limitation: No complaint shall lie in relation to any
offence under this Chapter after the expiry of three months from the
date of knowledge of commission of such offence.

176

Chapter-25
Offences Relating to Documents
276. Prohibition of forgery: (1) No person shall commit, or cause to be
committed, forgery.
(2)

For the purposes of sub-section (1), a person who makes

a false document or false electronic record or a part or portion of a
document or electronic record, with intent to cause any harm, injury
or damage to the public or to any person or to render any benefit to
the person himself or herself or to any person shall be considered to
commit forgery.
Explanation: For the purposes of this Section,(a)

"document" means signature, thumb impression,
seal affixed on any document and the figure,
word, date or any other content set forth in any
document.

(b)

"making a false document" means any of the
following acts:
(1)

to dishonestly prepare a document or part
of a document, make or transmit an
electronic record, archive digitals in an
electronic record, with the intention of
causing it to be believed that such
document was made, written, signed or
sealed by the person or authority who has
not actually made, written, signed or sealed
the document,

177

(2)

to, without lawful authority or dishonestly,
add or delete any content to or from, strike
out, change or otherwise alter or make
unclear any content of a document or
electronic record,

(3)

to cause any person to make, sign, seal, or
alter any content of, a document knowing
that such person by reason of being of
unsound mind due to mental illness or
intoxication of liquors or narcotics or by
reason of deception practiced on him or her
cannot know the meaning of any contents
set down in the document,

(4)

to prepare or use any envelope, paper
signed and delivered or any seal delivered
for a work or purpose other than that for
which such envelope, paper or seal was
signed, and delivered.

(3)

A person who commits the offence referred to in

sub-section (1) shall be liable to the following sentence:
(a)

A sentence of imprisonment for a term not
exceeding ten years and a fine not exceeding one
hundred thousand rupees, in the case of forgery of
a document authenticated by the President,

(b)

A sentence of imprisonment for a term not
exceeding eight years and a fine not exceeding

178

eighty thousand rupees, in the case of forgery of a
judgment or order of a court,
(c)

A sentence of imprisonment for a term not
exceeding seven years and a fine not exceeding
seventy thousand rupees, in the case of forgery of
a government or public document other than that
referred to in clauses (a) and (b),

(d)

A sentence of imprisonment for a term not
exceeding five years and a fine not exceeding
fifty thousand rupees, in the case of forgery of a
document other than that referred to in clauses
(a), (b) and (c).

(4)

A person who has already disposed of property which

he or she has obtained by committing forgery shall be liable to an
additional fine equal to the claimed amount, in addition to the
sentence referred in sub-section (3).
(5)

Where a person obtains any property by committing

forgery, the person shall return such property to the concerned
owner; and in the event that such property has already been disposed
of, the claimed amount of such property shall be caused to be
recovered to the owner from any other property of the offender.
277. Prohibition of possessing or using as genuine a forged document:
(1) No person shall, knowingly or having a reasonable reason to
believe that a document is a forged one, possess such document, with
intent to dishonestly use such document as genuine.

179

(2)

A person who commits, or causes to be committed, the

offence referred to in sub-section (1) shall be liable to a sentence of
imprisonment for a term not exceeding three years and a fine not
exceeding thirty thousand rupees.
(3)

A person who uses as genuine any document which he

or she knows or has a reasonable reason to believe to be a forged
document shall be liable to the sentence in the same manner as if he
or she had forged such document.
278. Prohibition of making instrument for making forged document:
(1) No person shall make, repair, purchase, exchange or possess any
seal or other instrument for making a forged document, with the
intention of using it in establishing or making a forged document, or
knowingly or having a reasonable reason to believe that it may be
used in such act.
(2)

A person who commits, or causes to be committed, the

offence referred to in sub-section (1) shall be liable to a sentence of
imprisonment for a term not exceeding four years and a fine not
exceeding forty thousand rupees.
279. Prohibition of committing fraud: (1) No person shall commit, or
cause to be committed, fraud.
(2)

For the purposes of sub-section (1), a person who, with

intent to disentitle any one, expire the statute of limitation or
appointed date for presence of, or cause, in any manner, loss,
damage, injury or benefit to, any one, knowingly does an act stating
that any thing has happened or been done which has not happened or
been done in fact or makes or signs a document containing a false

180

date, figure or content or causes another person to sign such
document or showing that he or she has entitlement in any thing in
which he or she has no such entitlement in fact, which does not
constitute the offence of forgery, shall be considered to commit the
offence of fraud.
(3)

A person who commits, or causes to be committed, the

offence referred to in sub-section (1) shall be liable to a sentence of
imprisonment for a term not exceeding three years or a fine not
exceeding thirty thousand rupees or both the sentences.
(4)

A person who has already disposed of property which

he or she has obtained by committing fraud shall be liable to an
additional fine equal to the claimed amount, in addition to the
sentence referred in sub-section (3).
(5)

Where a person obtains any property by committing

fraud, the person shall return such property to the concerned owner;
and in the event that such property has already been disposed of, the
claimed amount of such property shall be caused to be recovered to
the owner from any other property of the offender.
280. Prohibition of using as genuine a fraudulent document: (1) No
person shall, knowingly or having a reason to believe that a
document is a fraudulent one, use such document as genuine.
(2)

A person who commits, or causes to be committed, the

offence referred to in sub-section (1) shall be liable to the sentence in
the same manner as if he or she had committed fraud.
281. Liable to punishment as accomplice: A person who becomes a
witness to, or writes, a document knowing that the document is a

181

forged one shall be considered as an accomplice of the offence of
forgery.
(2)

An accomplice referred to in sub-section (1) shall be

liable to half the sentence set forth in sub-section (3) of Section 273.
282. Compensation ordered to be paid: Where any loss or damage is
caused to any person from the commission of any offence referred to
in this Chapter, a reasonable compensation shall be ordered to be
paid by the offender to such person who has suffered such loss or
damage.
283. Statute of limitation: No complaint shall lie, in relation to the
offence of forgery of a public document after the expiry of two years
from the date of knowledge of commission of such offence, and in
relation to any of the other offences under this Chapter, after the
expiry of six months from the date of knowledge of commission of
such offence.

182

Chapter-26
Offences Relating to Criminal Trespass and Criminal Mischief
284. Prohibition of committing criminal trespass: (1) No person shall
commit, or cause to be committed, criminal trespass into the property
of another person.
(2)

For the purposes of sub-section (1), a person who, with

intent to do the following act, enters, in an unauthorized manner, and
whether doing manhandling or not, into a property owned or
possessed by another person without obtaining such other person’s
permission or enters into such property with such permission but
remains in, or continues to occupy or use, that property with intent
thereby to do any of such acts shall be considered to commit criminal
trespass:
(a)

Committing any offence, or

(b)

Intimidating, insulting or annoying the owner or
possessor of the property.

(3)

A person commits the offence referred to in sub-section

(1) shall be liable to the following sentence:
(a)

In the case of a person who commits criminal trespass
for the purpose referred to in clause (a) of sub-section
(2), a sentence equal to the sentence imposable for
attempt to such offence,

(b)

In the case of criminal trespass into a government office
or human dwelling house for the purpose referred to in
clause

(b)

of

sub-section

(2),

a

sentence

of

imprisonment for a term not exceeding six months or a

183

fine not exceeding five thousand rupees or both the
sentences.
Explanation: For the purposes of this Section,(1)

A place of temporary residence shall also be
considered to be a house.

(2)

Entry into, or use of, a way, passage, water
collection center, irrigation canal, graveyard,
temple that have been in public use for time
immemorial shall not be considered to be
criminal trespass.

285. Prohibition of committing criminal mischief: (1) No person shall
commit, or cause to be committed, criminal mischief.
(2)

For the purposes of sub-section (1), a person who does

any of the following acts shall be considered to commit criminal
mischief:
(a)

Destroying, or doing such act as to diminish the value,
importance or utility of, any government, public or
private property, with the intention of causing any harm,
loss or damage to the Government of Nepal, State
Government or Local Level, any body corporate under
full or majority ownership or control of the Government
of Nepal, State Government or Local Level or public or
any person, or knowing or having a reasonable reason to
believe that such damage is likely to be caused, or
causing such damage by a negligent or reckless act,

184

(b)

Causing loss, damage or wrongful injury to, or doing
any act that causes injury to, or knowingly causing any
kind of obstruction, loss, damage or wrongful injury to
the utility of, any public or private sewerage, water
canal, drinking water pond, road, bridge or any means
of communications or transportation and the like,

(c)

Destroying, removing, erasing or tampering any mark or
sign fixed for public convenience, except for any act
done in pursuance of an order of the competent
authority, by spreading rumors or using any means of
deception,

(e)

Concealing, or dishonestly causing delay in the delivery
of, any correspondence, notice, parcel or other object of
another person.

(3)

A person who commits, or causes to be committed, the

offence referred to in sub-section (1) shall be liable to the following
sentence:
(a)

The sentence of imprisonment for life and a fine equal
to the claimed amount, in the case of setting fire to, or
using explosives, in any national park or reserve or
protected zone, with the objective of destroying the
existence of species of any wildlife or flora or fauna
protected by the Government of Nepal or protected
pursuant to law, any historical or archeological
monument or statue included in the world heritage list,
any site or museum in which objects of historical or
archeological importance are kept, or any achieve where

185

historical documents are kept, any military or paramilitary house or place in which arms and ammunition
of the army or police are stored, security press, mint,
factory, Nepal Rastra Bank's warehouse for bank note
printing or storing,
(b)

A sentence of imprisonment for a term of five to twelve
years and a fine equal to the claimed amount, in the case
of criminal mischief committed by setting fire to, or
using explosives in, any historical, archeological or
religious monument or statue other than that referred to
in clause (a), any building containing documents of
public

or

governmental

importance,

any

court

containing money (Tahabil), any constitutional body,
any office of the Government of Nepal, State
Government or Local Level or body under full or
majority ownership or control of the Government of
Nepal, State Government, or Local Level, or any office
of foreign diplomatic mission or international or intergovernmental organization,
(c)

A sentence of imprisonment for a term not exceeding
four years and a fine not exceeding forty thousand
rupees, in the case of criminal mischief committed by
doing any act other than that referred to in clause (a) or
(b), thereby causing injury to any public property,

(d)

A sentence of imprisonment for a term of two to five
years and a fine of twenty thousand to fifty thousand
rupees, in the case of criminal mischief committed by

186

setting fire to or using explosives in any house, office or
property of any person,
(e)

A sentence of imprisonment for a term not exceeding
three years and a fine not exceeding thirty thousand
rupees in the case of criminal mischief committed by
doing any act other than that referred to in clause (a),
(b), (c) or (d), thereby causing any loss, damage to any
person.

(4)

Where any loss, damage is caused to any person by

reason of the commission of the offence referred to in this Section, a
compensation equal to the claimed amount of such loss or damage so
caused shall be ordered to be paid by the offender to the victim of the
offence.
286. Prohibition of committing larceny (looting): (1) No person shall
commit, or cause to be committed, larceny.
(2)

For the purposes of sub-section (1), a person who does

any act, other than an act that constitutes theft or cheating, by which
he or she otherwise snatches, whether forcibly or not, takes, whether
by manhandling or fighting or giving threat thereof, or causes loss,
damage to any property which he or she has no right in or which is
under ownership, custody or control of another person, with the
intention of snatching, taking, or causing loss, damage to, such
property shall be considered to commit larceny.
(3)

A person who commits the offence referred to in sub-

section (1) shall be liable to a sentence of imprisonment for a term
not exceeding three months or a fine not exceeding twenty-five

187

percent of the claimed amount subjected to larceny or both the
sentences, and the claimed amount subjected to larceny shall be
ordered to be paid by the offender to the victim.
287. Prohibition of acquiring property obtained by committing
offence: (1) No person shall acquire, hold, purchase or sell any
property knowing or having a reasonable reason to believe that such
property has been obtained by committing an offence.
(2)

A person who commits, or causes to be committed, the

offence referred to in sub-section (1) shall be liable to a sentence of
imprisonment for a term not exceeding five years or a fine not
exceeding fifty thousand rupees or both the sentences.
(3)

The property acquired, held, purchased or sold as set

forth in sub-section (1) shall be returned to the owner of such
property.
288. Statute of limitation: A complaint in relation to an offence under
Section 284 or 285 shall not be entertained after the expiry of six
months from the date of commission of such offence, in relation to
the offence under Section 286, after the expiry of three months from
the date of commission of such offence, and in relation to any of
other offences under this Chapter, after the expiry of three months
from the date of having knowledge of the commission of such
offence.

188

Chapter-27
Offences Relating to Animals and Birds
289. Prohibition of killing or beating cows or oxen: (1) No person shall
do, or cause to be done, any act with the intention of killing, or
causing hurt to, any cow or ox.
(2)

Where any act referred to in sub-section (1) causes the

death of any cow or ox, the offender of such offence shall be liable to
a sentence of imprisonment for a term not exceeding three years.
(3)

A person shall be liable to a sentence of imprisonment

for a term not exceeding six months, if he or she causes grievous hurt
to a cow or ox, and to a sentence of a fine not exceeding fifty
thousand rupees if other hurt is caused.
(4)

Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1),

if a person does any act necessary to protect from any injury likely to
be caused by any cow or ox to the body or life of the person or
another person and such act causes the death of, or any harm to, such
cow or ox, the person shall not be considered to commit any offence
under this Section.
290. Prohibition of cruel treatment to animals and birds: (1) No
person shall subject any animal or bird to torture by beating or
hitting it, or by causing it to carry a load beyond its capacity or by
causing it to walk or run beyond its ability or by engaging it in work
if it is unable to work because of illness, wound or Khatira, or any
other cause, or by feeding it harmful substance or in any other
manner whatsoever or leave publicly any animal or bird which he or

189

she has grown up because of its being ill or aged or otherwise treat it
cruelly or mercilessly.
Provided that nothing shall bar the using of minimum force in
order to make any animal or bird do any work or carry a load
according to its physical capacity or make it run, with the objective
to teach or train it to do any wok or make it efficient on its work.
(2)

A person who commits the offence referred to in sub-

section (1) shall be liable to a sentence of imprisonment for a term
not exceeding three months or a fine not exceeding five thousand
rupees or both the sentences.
291. Prohibition of killing animals or birds in public places: (1) Except
as otherwise provided in this Act, no person shall kill any animal or
bird in any public place other than a religious place where there is a
tradition to offer sacrifice of an animal or bird.
Provided that nothing shall bar the killing of any animal or
bird in a fair, feast, exhibition or event or place where there is a
tradition of slaughtering animals or birds being practiced from time
immemorial.
Explanation: For the purposes of this Section, the term
“public place” means a way, road, bridge, meadow or place for
movement of human beings.
(2)

In making sacrifice of an animal or bird under sub-

section (1), no sacrifice of such animal or bird shall be executed in
any public place or religious place other than a religious place where
the sacrifice of animals or birds has been in practice from time
immemorial.

190

(3)

In making sacrifice of an animal or bird under sub-

section (1), any alternative measure, if any available, to such
sacrificing shall be adopted.
(4)

Where it is necessary to make sacrifice of an animal or

bird being it not possible to adopt the measure under sub-section (3),
such sacrifice shall be made at such place and in accordance with
such method as determined by the manager of the concerned
religious place.
(5)

A person who commits, or causes to be committed, the

offence referred to in this Section shall be liable to a sentence of
imprisonment for a term not exceeding one month or a fine not
exceeding five thousand rupees or both the sentences.
292. Statute of limitation: No complaint shall lie in relation to any of the
offences under Section 290, after the expiry of three months from the
date of commission of such offence, and in relation to any of the
other offences under this Chapter, after the expiry of three months
from the date of knowledge of commission of such act.

191

Part-3
Offences against Individual Privacy and Prestige
Chapter-1
Offences against Privacy
293. Prohibition of listening to or recording other's conversation: (1)
No person shall, by using a mechanical device, listen to, or record,
any conversation held between two or more persons, without
permission of the competent authority or consent of such persons
holding conversation.
(2)

A person who commits, or causes to be committed, the

offence referred to in sub-section (1) shall be liable to a sentence of
imprisonment for a term not exceeding two years or a fine not
exceeding twenty thousand rupees or both the sentences.
Provided that this Section shall not apply to any speech or
statement made publicly.
294. Prohibition of divulging confidential matter: (1) No person shall
divulge another person's confidential matter, which he or she comes
to know from such person in the course of his or her professional
work, except where such divulgence is compelled by law or
permitted by such person.
(2)

A person who commits the offence referred to in sub-

section (1) shall be liable to a sentence of imprisonment for a term
not exceeding one year or a fine not exceeding ten thousand rupees
or both the sentences.

192

295. Prohibition of taking or disfiguring photograph of any person
without his or her consent: (1) No person shall, without consent of
another person, take a photograph of that other person or make
another photograph by mixing other's photograph with the
photograph of that other person.
Provided that a person who, while taking a photograph of any
public place, happens to take also a photograph of any person
remaining in such place shall not be considered to commit the
offence under this Section.
(2)

A person who commits, or causes to be committed, the

offence referred to in sub-section (1) shall be liable to a sentence of
imprisonment for a term not exceeding one year or a fine not
exceeding ten thousand rupees or both the sentences.
(3)

No person shall make a disfigured photograph by

mixing some part of one's photograph with another part of other's
photograph or in any other manner or publish such disfigured
photograph.
(4)

A person who commits, or causes to be committed, the

offence referred to in sub-section (3) shall be liable to a sentence of
imprisonment for a term not exceeding two years or a fine not
exceeding twenty thousand rupees or both the sentences.
296. Prohibition of giving or selling one’s photograph to another
without consent: (1) No person shall give or sell one's photograph
without his or her consent to another person, or publish, publicize,
purchase or sell such photograph, with the intention of annoying,
disturbing or troubling him or her or taking any undue benefit from

193

him or her or taking benefit by making commercial use of such
photograph.
(2)

A person who commits, or causes to be committed, the

offence referred to in sub-section (1) shall be liable to a sentence of
imprisonment for a term not exceeding three years or a fine not
exceeding thirty thousand rupees or both the sentences.
297. Prohibition of opening letters or tapping telephone conversation:
(1) No person shall open a person's letter or tap or record a person’s
telephone conversation by using any mechanical device, without
permission of the competent authority or the concerned person.
(2)

A person who commits, or causes to be committed, an

offence under sub-section (1) shall be liable to a sentence of
imprisonment for a term not exceeding two years or a fine not
exceeding twenty thousand rupees or both the sentences.
298. Prohibition of breaching privacy through electronic means: (1)
No person shall obtain, in an unauthorized manner, a notice,
information and correspondence lying in or to be transmitted from
any electronic means or breach privacy thereof, or transfer, or cause
to be transferred, the same to another person in an unauthorized
manner.
(2)

A person who commits, or causes to be committed, the

offence referred to in sub-section (1) shall be liable to a sentence of
imprisonment for a term not exceeding two years or a fine not
exceeding twenty thousand rupees or both the sentences.
299. Prohibition of deceitfully making telephone calls or transmitting
messages: (1) No person shall deceitfully make, or cause to be made,

194

any telephone call or transmit any message, whether giving his or her
identity or not, with the intention of avoiding, deceiving, annoying or
troubling another person.
(2)

A person who commits the offence referred to in sub-

section (1) shall be liable to a sentence of imprisonment for a term
not exceeding two years or a fine not exceeding twenty thousand
rupees or both the sentences.
300. Prohibition of writing letters with dishonest intention of causing
annoyance: (1) No person shall, with the dishonest intention of
causing fear, terror or pain to, or annoying, insulting or defaming
another person, threat, annoy, tease that other person by writing or
causing to be written any letter, pamphlet or document of any other
type or through electronic means or otherwise behave such person
improperly.
(2)

A person who commits, or causes to be committed, the

offence referred to in sub-section (1) shall be liable to a sentence of
imprisonment for a term not exceeding one year or a fine not
exceeding ten thousand rupees or both the sentences.
301. Prohibition search other's body: (1) No person, except the
competent authority, or with the order of the competent authority, or
a person deputed for security purpose, with the permission of the
competent authority, shall search, or cause to be searched, another
person's body, vehicle or personal belongings without consent of that
other person.
(2)

A person who commits, or causes to be committed, the

offence referred to in sub-section (1) shall be liable to a sentence of

195

imprisonment for a term not exceeding one year or a fine not
exceeding ten thousand rupees or both the sentences.
302. Prohibition of unauthorized entry into other's residence: (1) No
person, except the competent authority or with the order of such
authority under law, shall authoritatively enter into another person's
house, breach the privacy of the house owner or his or her family or
search, or cause to be searched, such house, without the consent of
the concerned house owner.
Explanation: For the purposes of this Section, the term
"house" means a house, residence, housing, room where a person is
dwelling, and this term also includes a hotel room, camp and tent
where such person is staying to spend a night.
(2)

A person who commits the offence referred to in sub-

section (1) shall be liable to a sentence of imprisonment for a term
not exceeding three years or a fine not exceeding thirty thousand
rupees or both the sentences.
303. Compensation to be paid: Where a person derives any benefit or
causes any kind of damage, loss, annoyance or injury to another
person by committing the offence referred to in this Chapter, a
compensation for such damage, loss, annoyance or injury shall also
be ordered to be paid by the offender to the victim.
304. Statute of limitation: No complaint shall lie after the expiry of three
months from the date of commission of any offence under this
Chapter.

196

Chapter-2
Offence Relating to Defamation
305. Prohibition of committing slander: (1) No person shall slander
another person.
(2)

For the purposes of sub-section (1), a person who uses

degrading words, spoken or said, with the intention of lowering the
reputation of another person shall be deemed to commit slander.
(3)

A person who commits, or causes to be committed, the

offence referred to in sub-section (1) shall be liable to a sentence of
imprisonment for a term not exceeding one year or a fine not
exceeding ten thousand rupees or both the sentences.
306. Prohibition of committing libel: (1) No person shall defame
another person.
(2)

For the purposes of sub-section (1), a person who

commits any of the following acts shall be deemed to commit
defamation:
(a)

By words in writing, by conduct or by signs or by
visible representation or by publicity or by other means,
damaging the character of another person by making
imputation that, directly or indirectly, in the estimation
of others, lowers the personal or moral character,
conduct or reputation of that other person, or making
imputation that causes it to be believed that the body of
that other person is in a state generally considered as
disgraceful or disseminating or publishing such
imputation, with the intention of harming, or knowing,

197

or having a reasonable reason to believe that, such
imputation will harm, the reputation of that other
person, or knowingly selling or distribution any thing
which is used as a means of libeling any one,
(b)

Making any imputation against a deceased person if the
imputation would harm the reputation of that person if
living, and is intended to be hurtful to the feelings of his
or her family or other near relatives,

(c)

Making or expressing an imputation in the form of an
alternative or ironically.

(3)

Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in sub-

section (2), none of the following acts shall be considered to be libel:
(a)

Publishing or broadcasting any thing which is true
concerning any person, along with the evidence and
basis, for public good,

(b)

Publishing in good faith and decently any thing
respecting the conduct of any public servant in the
discharge of his or her public functions or respecting his
or her character only so far as his or her character
appears in that conduct,

(c)

Expressing in good faith any opinion respecting the
conduct of public office or position of any person and
respecting his or her character only so far as his or her
character appears in that conduct,

(d)

Expressing in good faith and decently any opinion
respecting the merits of any performance which its

198

author has submitted to the public for opinion or
respecting the character of the author only so far as his
or her character appears in such performance,
(e)

Passing in good faith any censure on the conduct of a
person who has over another person any authority,
either conferred by law or arising out of a contract made
with that other person in matters to which such authority
relates.

(f)

Investigating into any offence in accordance with law or
preferring accusation against him or her on that basis in
accordance with law,

(g)

Cautioning a person against other person, for his or her
benefit or for the benefit of a person having his or her
interest or for the benefit of the public.

307. Punishment for libel: (1) A person who commits, or causes to be
committed, libel shall be liable to a sentence of imprisonment for a
term not exceeding two years or a fine not exceeding twenty
thousand rupees or both the sentences.
Provided that if libel is committed or, caused to be committed,
by means of electronic or other means of mass communication, there
shall be imposed an additional sentence of imprisonment for a term
not exceeding one year or a fine not exceeding ten thousand rupees
in addition to such punishment.
(2)

If a person is convicted of libeling another person or

causing such libel, a reasonable compensation to be set having regard
to, inter alia, the gravity of the offence, effect caused to the

199

reputation of such person and the commission of libel by means of
electronic or other means of mass communication, shall be ordered
to be paid by the offender to the libeled person, and litigation costs
shall also be ordered to be paid by the offender to the libeled person.
(3)

If a person is convicted of libeling a deceased under this

Chapter, such compensation and litigation costs shall be ordered to
be paid by the offender to the near successor to the deceased whose
feeling was hurt.
308. Statute of limitation: No complaint shall lie after the expiry of three
months from the date of knowledge of commission of any offence
under this Chapter.

200

